The Twelve Houses

1.BASIC PREMISES

One may indeed say that it is not the event which happens to the person, but the personwhich happens to the event.Dane Rudhyar
There are three basic ingredients which combine to make up an astrological chart–planets, signsandhouses.Planets represent particular psychological drives, urges and motivations. Like verbs, they depict a certain action which is going on – for example, Marsasserts,Venusharmonizes,Jupiterexpands,Saturnrestricts,etc. The signs represent twelve qualities of being or attitudes towards life. The drive of a planet is expressed through the sign in which the planet is placed. Mars can assert in an Arien way or Taurean way; Venus can harmonize in a Geminian or Cancerian fashion, and so on.Houses,however, show the specific areas of everyday life or fields of experience in which all this is occurring. Mars in Taurus will assert itself in a slow and steady manner, but its placement by house determines the exact area of life in which this slow and steady action can most obviously be observed – whether it is in the person’s career that he or she acts that way, or in his or her relationships, or at school, etc. Put very simply, the planets showwhatis happening, the signshowit is happening, and the houseswhereit is happening.
Serving as the lens to focus and personalize the planetary blueprint onto the landscape of actual life, the houses bring the chart down to earth. And yet the meanings and functions of the twelve houses are usually the least understood of all the basic astrological factors. It is the purpose of this book to examine how a proper appreciation of the signs and planets in each of the twelve houses can guide us to our true identity, illuminating the path of self-discovery and the unfoldment of our life-plan.
There are a few reasons why the full significance of the houses has been so often overlooked. Most astrological textbooks dwell on the traditional ‘outer’ meaning of each house and neglect its more subtle or basic underlying principle. Unless the core meaning of a house is grasped, the true essence of that house is lost. For instance, the 11th house is normally known as the ‘House of Friends, Groups, Hopes and Wishes’. At first this may seem strange – what do friends and groups have to do with hopes and wishes? Why are these things all lumped together under the same house? However, when the deeper, most basic principle of the house is explained, then the connection becomes clear. The kernel of the 11th house is ‘the urge to become something greater than we already are.’ We do this by connecting to something greater than our separate selves – by aligning ourselves with friends and social circles, by joining groups, by identifying with causes which lift us out of ourselves and encompass us in a vaster scheme of things. But the desire to become something greater than we already are mustalso be accompanied by the capacity to envision new and different possibilities. In other words, hoping and wishing for something moves us beyond existing images and models of ourselves. We must have a dream before we can have a dream come true. Understood in the context of the desire to extend our already existing sphere of experience, the 11th house labels of ‘friends, groups, hopes and wishes’ begin to make sense in relationship to one another.
The conventional way in which the influence of planets and signs in the houses has been interpreted is another obstacle to fully appreciating the significance of each house. Perceiving events as purely external circumstances which befall us, traditional astrology interprets placements in the chart in a deterministic and fatalistic light, and fails to comprehend the part we play in shaping and constituting what happens to us. An ‘event-orientated’ astrologer, for instance, might say to a man with Saturn in the 11th house something like ‘Your friends will restrict and disappoint you.’ This may be true, but what good does such an interpretation do for anyone?
The philosophical premise upon which psychological astrology is based is that a person’s reality springs outward from his or her inner landscape of thoughts, feelings, expectations and beliefs. For the man with Saturn in the 11th, trouble with friends is only the tip of the iceberg – the outer manifestation of something which he, himself, is responsible for creating. His difficulty relating with companions is the surface manifestation of something much deeper: his fear of expanding his boundaries to include something other than himself. He wants to become greater than he already is – to identify with something beyond his existing sense of self – and yet he is afraid of endangering the identity he already has. The 11th house urges him to encompass a greater reality but Saturn says ‘Hold on, preserve what you are already familiar with.’ Understood in this way, it is not friendship which restricts him, buthis own restrictionswhich limit his friendships. The astrologer who points out this dilemma ushers the man into the vestibule of change. Confronting these apprehensions, examining their origins, and looking at the possible ways of dealing with his fears, are the keys which open the door to further growth and development. When appreciated in the context of unfolding his potential and realizing his life-plan, this man’s difficulties with friends becomes a necessary and productive phase of experience. Grappling with Saturn in the 11th, rather than avoiding it or blaming it on others, is one way he ‘makes of himself what he is supposed to become’. How infinitely more beneficial this interpretation of an 11th house Saturn is than ‘Sorry, old chap, your friends are no good.’
In his bookThe Astrology of Personality,Dane Rudhyar, a pioneer of person-centred astrology, proposes that reading the chart is to read thedharmaof the person.1In a later work,The Astrological Houses,he elaborates more fully on this, emphasizing that the planets and signs in each house offer ‘celestial instructions’ on how a person can most naturally unfold his or her life-plan in that area of existence.2As far as possible, this book interprets the planets and signs through the houses in this perspective. However, besides just indicating the most authentic way to fulfil our intrinsic potentialities, the house placements also show ourinnate predispositionto perceive the experiences associated with each house in the context of the signs and planets found there. For example, a woman with Pluto in the 7th house is predisposed from birth to expect Pluto in connection with the affairs of that house. What’s more, because Pluto is what she is expecting there, Pluto is precisely what she will find.
What we see in life is coloured by what we expect to see. Twenty-eight students were asked to describe what they saw when a deck of playing cards was flashed one-by-oneonto a screen. Their basic expectation (or orienting paradigm) was the preconception that a pack of cards consists of four suits: two black (spades and clubs) and two red suits (hearts and diamonds). However, when the experimenters slipped aredsix of spades into the deck, many of the students simply refused the evidence of their own eyes and ‘converted’ the red spade to black in their descriptions. In other words, when the red six of spades was flashed onto the screen, they didn’t even notice the card’s incongruity to their expectations of what a six of spades should look like. They saw only what they expected to see, not what wasactuallythere.3
Similarly, our archetypal expectations, as seen through the signs and planets in the houses, precondition us to certain ways of experiencing life. The woman born with Pluto in the 7th, then, will filter issues relating to partnership through the lens of that planet. In this sense, she is ‘stuck’ with Pluto in that dimension of life, just as an acorn is stuck with becoming an oak. Nothing she can do will change that planet being there. But once she becomesconsciously awarethat Pluto is the context in which she views the 7th house, a few alternatives open to her which didn’t exist previously.
To begin with, she can ask herself what purpose the 7th house Pluto serves in the overall unfoldment of her life-plan. In this way, she accepts and begins to co-operate with her inborn nature. Secondly, instead of blaming life or other people for the state of affairs in that house, she can try to understand the role she has played in creating the circumstances there. By doing this, she imbues the experiences in her life with greater meaning and significance – they are not just random events which ‘happen’ to her. Finally, if she can ‘use’ Pluto in its most constructive connotations, she is less likely to have to suffer its gruelling side any longer than necessary. On one level, Pluto implies the tearing down of forms and the collapse of existing structures. But on another level, Pluto represents transformation and rebirth into a whole new way of being. Through altering the perspective in which she views what is happening, she can understand Pluto’s upheavals as necessary opportunities for growth and change. By facing and coming to terms with the kinds of traumas associated with this planet, she ‘shifts’ levels and finds that Pluto has a whole other dimension of experience to offer. She learns what Paracelsus observed so long ago, that ‘the deity which brings the illness also brings the cure.’
Awareness brings change. Through examining the house placements in our charts, we not only are given clues as to the best way to meet life in that area, but we also gain insight into the underlying archetypal expectations operating within us. Once we become aware that we have an inborn bias to see things in a certain context, we can begin to work constructively within that framework, gradually expanding its borders to allow for other alternatives. Bearing this in mind, the reader can use this book both as a tool for personal development and as a guide for chart interpretation. The suggested meaning of each planet and sign through the houses is intended to serve as a broad and general outline, hopefully inspiring further thought and reflection on the nature of each placement.
My suggestions should not be taken as gospel or applied too rigidly, and I apologize for the inherent limitations of the ‘cookbook’ format. My firm belief is that every factor in the chart can only be fully appreciated in the light of the whole chart. Furthermore, the expression of any placement in the horoscope is contingent on the X-factor of the level of consciousness of the entity for whom it is drawn. A woman might be born at the same time, place and date as her pet frog, and the two charts would look exactly thesame. But the frog expresses the birth map according to its level of awareness, and the woman according to hers. Because our level of consciousness plays such a crucial role in determining the ‘outcome’ and meaning of placements in the chart, no rigid interpretation of any one factor can be fixed. Each of us is more than the sum of the parts of the chart. Each of us has the potential for greater awareness, freedom and fulfilment.
Notes – Chapter 11. Dane Rudhyar,The Astrology of Personality, Servire/Wassenaar, Netherlands, 1963, p. 223.2. Dane Rudhyar,The Astrological Houses, Doubleday, New York, 1972, p. 38.3. Sue Walrond-Skinner,Famuy Therapy, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1976, pp. 23-4.
