The Twelve Houses

2.SPACE, TIME AND BOUNDARIES

A human being is part of the whole, called by us ‘Universe’; a part limited in time andspace.Albert Einstein
According to the Bible, God began His great work by creating the universe and then dividing it into different parts. He made the heavens separate from the earth, light separate from darkness, and day separate from night. In an attempt to manage, understand and make sense of existence, human beings exhibit this same tendency to divide the wholeness of life into various component parts and phases. Similarly, the birthchart, the map of an individual’s existence, reflects this slicing of life into different sections – the sum total of which make a whole.
The Division of Space
No matter how haphazard the universe might seem at times, it is, nonetheless, fairly orderly. Cyclic and predictable, the celestial bodies manage to keep on their paths and adhere to their proper motion. Perhaps in an attempt to ascribe meaning and order to their lives, our early human ancestors observed a relationship between celestial events (the movements of the Sun, Moon and planets) and life on earth. But they needed to have a frame of reference or backdrop by which to plot and pinpoint the positions of these moving lights in the sky. In order to do this, space was divided into different sections and labelled.Fig. 1 The Division of Space
Fig. 2 Planets mapped against the ecliptic for January 1st, 1985
Modern astrologers are faced with the same problem – how to divide space to create a frame of reference by which to identify the positions of the celestial bodies. It so happens, from a geocentric point of view, that the Sun, Moon and planets all appear to move in a broad circular path around the Earth. This path extends approximately 8 or 9 degrees on either side of what is known as theecliptic– the apparent path of the Sun around the Earth – and is called theZodiac Belt.The ecliptic is then divided into twelve signs of thirty degrees each, starting with 0 degrees of Aries, the point where the Sun’s path intersects the celestial equator (the Earth’s equator projected into space) at the Spring Equinox. In this sense, the signs of the Zodiac (Aries, Taurus, Gemini, etc.)*are subdivisions of the ecliptic, the apparent yearly movement of the Sun around the Earth (see Figure1). The positions of the planets are mapped against these divisions of the ecliptic, showing what sign each planet happens to be passing through on any particular day of the year (see Figure2).
The planets, each at its own rate, continually move through the different signs. The Sun takes approximately one month to pass through a sign, and roughly one year to make a full circle of all the signs along the ecliptic. The Moon spends about 2½ days in each sign and takes 27⅓ days to pass through all twelve signs. Uranus takes approximately 7 years to pass through a sign and roughly 84 years to make a full circle. As stated in Chapter 1, a planet describes a particular kind of activity which expresses itself according to the nature of the sign in which it is placed.

The Division of Time
The wordhoroscopecomes from the Greek word ‘horoscopus’, meaning ‘consideration of the hour’ or ‘consideration of the ascending degree’. In other words, the horoscope is literally a ‘time-map’. By dividing the space in the heavens into signs, the early astrologers were able to plot the position of the planets in the sky. But they soon realized that something more was needed – a frame of reference to link the planetary pattern to a particular person born at a certain time and place.
Besides the movement caused by the apparent revolution of the Sun, Moon and the planets around the Earth, there is another type of movement which the horoscope must take into consideration:the daily rotation of the Earth on its own axis.The early astrologers had to find some way to correlate the celestial phenomena of planets moving through the signs to the terrestrial phenomenon of the daily rotation of the Earth on its own axis.
The most obvious way of doing this was to divide the twenty-four-hour rotation of the Earth into sections based on how long it took the Sun to move from its position at dawn to its position at noon, and from its noon point to its sunset point, etc. Because at certain times of the year the Sun would spend longer above the horizon, these divisions would not always be equal.
Martin Freeman, in his bookHow to Interpret a Birth Chart,1helps the beginning student of astrology conceptualize the kind of movement caused by the rotation of the Earth. He suggests that we imagine a day in early spring. From the point of view of the Earth, the Sun in early spring is situated in that part of the Zodiacal Belt which is known as Aries. At sunrise on the day in question, the Sun and the sign of Aries will be seen appearing over the eastern horizon of the observer on Earth. By noon of that day, however, the Sun and Aries are no longer due east – they have moved to a position more or less overhead of the observer, and a different sign, probably Cancer, is on the eastern horizon. By sunset, the Sun and Aries will be seen to be setting over the western horizon, and the opposite sign of Libra (180 degrees away from Aries) will be rising over the eastern horizon. At sunrise the next day, the Sun and Aries will again be seen in the east, but the Sun would have moved approximately one degree further along in the sign of Aries. Thus, due to the daily rotation of the Earth on its own axis, the position of the signs (and any planets which happen to be in them) changes in relation to the horizon.
The Division of the Chart into Angles
To understand houses it is essential to remember that we are dealing with two kinds of movement – that of the Earth and the other planets around the Sun, but also the movement of the Earth on its axis. The division of the mundane sphere into what eventually became known as the houses arose out of a need to relate the axial rotation of the Earth with the movement of the planets in the sky. While signs are subdivisions of the apparent revolution of the Sun, Moon and planets around the Earth, houses are subdivisions of the Earth’s diurnal (daily) rotation on its own axis.
InThe Astrological Houses,Dane Rudhyar expands Cyril Fagan’s view that what we now refer to as houses were originally periods of time called ‘watches’. Watches were based on the movement of the Sun as it rose in the east, passed overhead of the observer, and set in the west. Each watch covered approximately six hours of time, marking the points of sunrise, noon, sunset and midnight. By the advent of the Renaissance, astrologers had devised several methods of dividing these watches intothe twelve houses of the horoscope. Furthermore, they had developed a correspondence between various types of human activity and the different watches or houses. In this way, the houses became the frame of reference through which the potentialities of a planet and sign combination could be related to the actual events and concerns of life. Without the structure of the houses, astrologers cannot bring the significance of celestial events down to earth.Fig. 3 The Four Angles
It is an easy step from the four watches to the four points in the chart known astheAngles(see Figure3). From the point of view of an observer’s position on Earth, at any time of day, a certain sign will be seen to be rising in the east while its opposite sign (180 degrees away) will be seen to be setting in the west. The degree of the sign occupying the easternmost point in the sky is called theAscending Degreeand the sign it is in is called theAscendantorRising Sign.Astronomically, the Ascendant marks the intersection of the ecliptic with the observer’s horizon – in other words, the meeting of heaven and earth. The opposite point to the Ascendant is theDescendant,the sign setting in the west. The line connecting the Ascendant and Descendant is called theaxis of thehorizon.
Likewise, at any time of the day for an observer on Earth, a particular degree of a certain sign will be ‘culminating’ at the upper meridian, the point due south of the place in question. This is called theMidheavenorMC, an abbreviation for the Latin termMedium Coeli,the ‘middle of the heavens’. The opposite point to the Midheaven is called theImum CoeliorIC,an abbreviation for ‘the lowest heavens’. The line connecting the Midheaven to the Imum Coeli is called theaxis of the meridian.
These four points are determined astronomically. Collectively calledthe Angles,the signs found on these points reveal a great deal about an individual’s orientation to basic experiences in life. Their significance is more fully discussed in later chapters. The intersection of the axis of the horizon and the axis of the meridian give rise to the fourQuadrantsof the chart. Owing to the tilt of the Earth, the size of the quadrants arising from this fourfold division are seldom equal, and will vary according to the latitude and time of year of the birth.
The Division of the Four Angles into the Twelve Houses
While determining the angles does not raise too many problems, the manner in which the four angles should (or should not) be trisected to form the twelve houses is a major controversy in astrology.
On the whole, there seems to be general agreement that the line of the horizon – the Ascendant-Descendant axis – is the basis upon which the division of the chart into houses should rest. In other words, most astrologers agree that the Ascendant should mark thecusp(or beginning point, or leading edge) of the 1st house and the Descendant should mark the cusp (or beginning point) of the 7th house. After that, astrologers disperse in all directions. Those who support the Equal House System of house-division provide the least complicated solution. Calling the Ascendant the cusp of the 1st house, they simply divide the ecliptic into twelve equal-sized houses of thirty degrees each. So, if the Ascendant were 13 degrees of Cancer, then the 2nd house would be 13 degrees of Leo, the 3rd house 13 degrees of Virgo, etc. In the case of Equal House charts, the Midheaven does not necessarily coincide with any house cusp.
However, in Quadrant systems of house-division, the four points of the angles all correspond to house cusps: the Ascendant becomes the 1st house cusp, the IC becomes the 4th house cusp, the Descendant becomes the 7th house cusp, and the Midheaven becomes the 10th house cusp. But how the intermediate house cusps (that is, the cusps of the 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 8th, 9th, 11th and 12th houses) should be calculated raises many questions. In some of these systems,spaceis divided to determine these cusps; in other systemstimeis the factor upon which the division is made. A fuller discussion of the question of house-division is included in Appendix 2. Personally, and for reasons explained in the Appendix, I favour Quadrant systems over the Equal House System and for the purposes of this book, will generally relate the cusp of the 10th house to the Midheaven, and the cusp of the 4th house to theImum Coeli.
One way or another, we want to end up with twelve houses. Why twelve? The most obvious reason for this is that astrologers believed that the division of the mundane sphere into houses should mirror the division of the ecliptic into twelve signs. Rudhyar offers a more philosophical answer. He argues that each quarter of the chart (as defined by the Ascendant, IC, Descendant and Midheaven) should be divided into three houses because ‘each operation of life is basically threefold, including action, reaction, and the result of both.’2In his opinion, then, the 2nd and 3rd houses carry out the significanceof the Ascendant and 1st house; the 5th and 6th houses fulfil what is begun by the IC and 4th house; the 8th and 9th houses continue what is started by the Descendant and 7th house; and the 11th and 12th houses complete what was initiated by the Midheaven and 10th house. Besides justifying the need for twelve houses, Rudhyar’s reasoning helps us to appreciate the fact that the meaning and relevance of each house follows on logically from the previous one. More will be said on the cyclic process of the houses later.
The houses are traditionally counted anti-clockwise from the Ascendant. The 1st and 7th houses are always opposite one another – this means that the sign on the 7th house cusp will be the opposite sign to the one on the 1st house cusp, although the actual degree on the cusp will stay the same. This same rule applies to the other pairs of opposite houses: the 2nd and 8th, the 3rd and 9th, the 4th and 10th, the 5th and 11th and the 6th and 12th.
Martin Freeman makes the relationship between the signs of the zodiac and the twelvefold division of the houses clearer by picturing the zodiac as a ‘great wheel surrounding the Earth along whose rim the planets move’. This wheel is fixed against the background of the heavens, and the signs are marked along the edge. The twelve houses are like the ‘spokes of a moving wheel superimposed on the greater wheel’. The spokes of the houses rotate a full circle every twenty-four hours in line with the daily rotation of the Earth. The particular way the wheel of the houses is related to the wheel of the zodiac at the time and place of birth is what makes the chart unique for each individual.3
Since the Earth rotates once every twenty-four hours, the twelve signs and ten planets pass through the twelve houses in that period. The birthchart is a frozen moment in time which shows the particular alignment of planets, signs and houses for the time and place of birth. Two people may be born on the same day and have the same sign positions of the planets, but because they are born in a different place or at a different time, the planetary pattern will be seen in a different area of the heavens, i.e. in different houses.
So far we have divided space into signs, divided time into four quadrants, and divided four quadrants into twelve houses. That’s enough dividing for now. It’s time to assign meaning to the houses, and consider their relationship to one another, and to our lives.
The Natural Zodiac
Since the houses are determined by the line of the horizon (where heaven and earth meet), they relate the activities and energies symbolized by the planets in the signs (celestial events) to actual life on earth (terrestrial events). In other words, the houses show specific areas of everyday experience through which the operations of the signs and planets manifest. Each of the twelve houses represents a different department of life – a particular phase of what Rudhyar calls ‘the spectrum of experience’.4
But we still have the problem of assigning meaning to the different houses. Generally, the meaning of each house mirrors the meaning of the twelve signs of the zodiac: Aries is considered similar to the 1st house, Taurus is considered similar to the 2nd house, and so on right through to the connection of Pisces with the 12th house. In what is called theNatural Zodiac(see Figure4), the first degree of Aries is placed on the Ascendant, the first degree of Taurus is placed on the cusp of the 2nd house, the first degree of Geminiis placed on the cusp of the 3rd house, etc. The Natural Zodiac is symbolic, and its main purpose is to help the student gain a deeper understanding of what the houses signify.In actual practice, the houses in a person’s chart will almost never align themselves in such anexact correspondence with the signs as in the Natural Zodiac.Fig. 4 The Natural Zodiac
The coupling of 0 degrees of Aries with the Ascendant does make sense, however, because both Aries and the Ascendant (cusp of the 1st house) are beginning points in their respective cycles. The yearly cycle of the Sun’s apparent movement around the Earth begins with 0 degrees of Aries – the point where the celestial equator intersects the ecliptic at the Spring Equinox. The daily cycle of the Sun through the houses symbolically begins with the Ascendant – the point where the horizon of the observer on Earth intersects the ecliptic. Since Aries and the Ascendant both connote beginnings, it is understandable that they should share a similar meaning. Aries is a sign which implies ‘initiation’, fresh starts, and the first impulse to act. The Ascendant and 1st house are associated with birth and the way in which we meet life. The ruler of Aries, Mars, also denotes initiatory energy, the will-to-be, and the urge to make an impact on the environment.
Zipporah Dobyns, inThe Astrologer’s Casebook,5describes astrology as a symbolic language in which the signs, planets and houses form the alphabet. She feels that astrology depicts twelve ways of being in the world, or twelve sides of life. These twelveaspects of the totality of life can be written in different ways, just as in the English alphabet we have upper case, lower case and italic letters. Signs symbolize one form of the letters of the alphabet, planets another, and houses another still. Signs, planets and houses, in other words, represent different ways in which the same twelve basic principles can be expressed. More specifically, Aries, Mars and the 1st house represent one letter, Taurus, Venus and the 2nd house another; Gemini, Mercury and the 3rd house represent a third letter, etc. It must be remembered, however, that any planet or any sign can be located in any house depending on the exact time, place and date of birth. Therefore, the factors symbolized by a sign, planet or house will be found to be mixed.
The Houses as Fields of Experience
In many textbooks, each house is generally allotted a field of experience, describing a particular set of circumstances in a person’s life. For instance, one traditional meaning of the 4th house is ‘the home’, of the 9th house is ‘long journeys’, and one of the areas covered by the 12th house is ‘institutions’. Texts tell us that if we want to know what a person’s home is like, we should examine that person’s 4th house. If we want to know what will happen to a person on long journeys, we should analyse the 9th house; and if we want to find out how someone will fare in hospitals or prisons we should consider the placements in the 12th. While sometimes quite accurate, this way of interpreting houses is flat, boring and not very helpful. If Chapter 1, I emphasized that the core meaning of the house must be grasped – that essential inner meaning from which spring all the endless associations and possibilities connected to that house. The 4th house is referred to as the house of ‘the home’ for a reason and that reason should be understood. The 9th house is associated with ‘long journeys’ because travel is just one way that a more general process associated with the 9th house can be lived out. ‘Hospitals and prisons’ hardly scratch the surface of the 12th house. In Part II of this book, we crack the shell of each house in an attempt to cut through all its layers and ‘get at’ the meaty, archetypal kernel.
Planets and signs in a house reveal much more than just what might be waiting ‘out there’ for us. Placements in a house describe the inner landscape – the inborn images we carry within which are then ‘projected’ onto that sphere. We filter what is happening outside through the subjective lens of the sign(s) or planet(s) in a house. If Pluto is in the 4th house, even something ‘nice’ someone does for us in our home might be perceived as dangerous, underhand and threatening. But, most importantly, the signs and planets in a house suggest the best and most natural manner in which we ‘should’ meet that area of life in order to unfold and realize our inherent potentialities. As Dane Rudhyar writes, ‘Each house of the chart symbolizes a specialized aspect of [our]dharma.’6
The Houses as Process
In a lecture entitled ‘Creating a Sacred Psychology’,7the psychologist Jean Houston related an anecdote about the life of Margaret Mead. As a child, Margaret asked her mother to teach her how to make cheese. Her mother replied, ‘Yes, dear, but you are going to have to watch the calf being born.’ From the calf being born to making cheese – Margaret Mead was taught as a child to do entire processes from beginning, to middle, to end.
Dr Houston laments that we are the victims of an ‘age of interrupted process’. We turn on a switch and the world is set in motion. We know a little about the beginning of things; we know a little about the end of things; but we have no idea about the middle. We have lost the sense of the natural rhythms of life.
Our current culture is insufferably imbalanced. Before the sixteenth century the dominant world view was organic. People lived close to nature in small social groups, and perceived their own needs as subordinate to those of the community. Natural science had its basis in reasonandfaith, and the material and spiritual were inextricably linked. By the seventeenth century, this world view had changed dramatically. The sense of an organic, spiritual universe was replaced by a different notion: the world as a machine, which functioned on the basis of mechanical laws, and which could be explained in terms of the movement and arrangement of its various parts. The Earth was no longer the Great Mother, sentient and alive, but a mechanism, reducible to bits and pieces like a clock. Descartes’ famous statement, ‘Cogito, ergo sum’ – I think, therefore I am – heralded a major split between mind and matter. People moved into their heads and left the rest of their bodies behind. Fragmentation became the rule of the day, and continues to reign even though twentieth-century physics has shown thatrelationship is everything– thatnothingcan be understood isolated from its context.
Ironically, astrology, the study of nature’s cycles and movements, also lost its sense of process and its feeling for the organic wholeness of life. The mechanistic world view led to a belief that nature could and should be controlled, dominated and exploited. Similarly, astrology came to emphasize prediction and outcome at the expense of an understanding of the deeper significance of things. Houses were described by keywords and meanings which made them seem as if they were unrelated to one another, or only loosely connected. Why is the 2nd house of ‘money, resources and possessions’ followed by the 3rd house of ‘the mind, immediate environment, and brothers and sisters’? Why is the 6th house of ‘work, health and small animals’ spawned by the 5th house of ‘creative self-expression, hobbies and spare-time activities’? Surely, just as summer follows spring and day turns into night, there must be some fundamental reason why one house leads on to the next.
Houses are not separate, isolated, dangling segments of life. Conceived in their totality, they unfold a process of supreme significance – the story of the emergence and development of a human being. Starting at birth from the Ascendant, we are not even aware of ourselves as distinct from anything else. Gradually, house by house, through a series of steps, phases, dances and changes we build an identity which can ultimately expand to include all of creation. We emerge out of an amorphous sea, take shape, and then merge back again. Unless appreciated as a process of unfoldment, both life and the houses forfeit their essential meaning. Process is embedded in the very root of human experience. Division is only one part of the entire cycle, and yet we imprison ourselves in it. But wholeness is everything.
Notes – Chapter 21. Martin Freeman,How to Interpret a Birth Chart, Aquarian Press, Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, England, 1981, p. 13.2. Dane Rudhyar,The Astrology of Personality, p. 219.3. Freeman, p. 59.4. Dane Rudhyar,The Astrological Houses, title page.5. Zipporah Dobyns and Nancy Roof,The Astrologer’s Casebook, TIA Publications, Los Angeles, California, 1973, p. 6.6. Dane Rudhyar,The Astrological Houses, p. 38.7. Jean Houston,Creating A Sacred Psychology, Wrekin Trust Cassette No. 81, Hereford, England.
*The signs bear the same names as the constellations, but due to a phenomenon known as thePrecession of the Equinoxes,the signs and constellations no longer coincide.
