The Twelve Houses
4.THE SECOND HOUSE

Mama may have, Papa may havebut God bless the child that got his ownBillie Holiday
With the 1st house, the initial spark of individual identity has manifested and our general approach to life has been defined. Now the task at hand is the further elaboration of who we are, the forging of a more solid sense of ‘I’ or the personal ego.*We need more definition, more substance, a greater sense of our own worth and abilities. We need some idea of what it is that we possess which we can call our own. We also should have some notion of what we value, of what we would like to accrue or gain so that we can structure our life accordingly. The 2nd house, associated with the earthy sign of Taurus and the planet Venus, and usually described under the umbrella of ‘Values, Possessions, Money and Resources’, covers this phase of the journey.
The traditional labelling of the 2nd house makes it sound as if it covers only that which is concrete and tangible and of interest to the tax inspector. Don’t be fooled – there is much more under this umbrella than meets the eye.
Although birth is the beginning of our development as a separate individual, it usually takes up to six months before werecognizewe have a body, and even longer to fully differentiate self from not-self. A big step forward towards establishing ourselves as an entity distinct from everything else is taken when we realize that Mother (who is the whole world to us) is actuallynot us. Before then, she has been seen purely as an extension of who we are. Gradually we develop a sense of inhabiting a physical form which is not hers nor anybody else’s: ‘These aremytoes, not Mother’s toes; these aremyhands, not Mother’s hands – they belong to me, they define me, they are whatI amand whatIpossess.’ But the discovery of our body as separate also awakens a sense of our vulnerability and finiteness which has not been present before. With this fearful realization comes the need to defend the separate self against death and destruction. We yearn to make ourselves more stable, permanent, solid and enduring.
The body is the first thing by which we define ourselves, but the way is now paved for further self-definition as we attach more and more things to ourselves through which we derive and give substance to our ego-identity. As time goes by we will develop a sense of other things we possess besides the body – a good mind, a clever tongue, a sympathetic nature, a practical ability, an artistic flair, etc. The 2nd house describes what we possess or hope to possess as well as those resources or attributes which, when developed, will give us the sense of substance, value, worth, safety and security previously provided by our identification with Mother. For most people this is money, although its mindless pursuit leads not to self-definition but to despair: witnessthe number of men queuing to jump off the tenth-floor window-ledge after the crash of 1929. More positively, the desire for money may serve as a spur to develop certain qualities and faculties which otherwise might remain latent. Although the 2nd house is traditionally associated with money, it should be noted that other things can fulfil the need for safety, security and a more substantial sense of identity besides enlarging our bank balance.Second house
On a more basic level, the 2nd house is an indication of what constitutes our personal security. Different things represent security to different people. For instance, if Gemini or Mercury is in the 2nd house then possessing knowledge may be what makes the person feel safe. Those with Pisces or Neptune in the 2nd could derive their security from a ‘spiritual’ philosophy or religion. If something makes us feel more safe and secure, then naturally we will want to acquire it.
Signs and planets in the 2nd house also serve as guidelines indicating the kinds of inherent faculties and capabilities which we can develop and concretize, and through which we gain a greater sense of self-worth. The 2nd house depicts our innate wealth which can be tapped – our substance or soil which can be tilled productively. For instance, if Mars or Aries should fall there, then potential valuable qualities which the person might actualize would be along the lines of what Mars and Aries represent: courage, directness and the ability to know what one wants and how to get it. Venus and Libra might bestow natural good taste, artistic talent, diplomatic savoir-faire, or physical attractiveness as assets. Any placement in any house gives clues to our most natural path of unfoldment in that area of life. Why not listen to these clues?
In addition to providing a stocklist of potential capacities, the 2nd house also designates our relationship to the sphere of money and possessions: that is, our attitudes towards the material world and the conditions we encounter in this realm. Whether we worship Mammon as a god or consider the world of form as allmayaor illusion would be shown by placements here. Also indicated is the manner, style or rhythm with which we approach earning money and the development of skills and resources – be it keen, lethargic or fitful. Do we hold on tight or do we allow things to slip through our fingers? Do we have to exert tremendous effort in this area of life orare we blessed with a Midas touch? Do we still want what we have once we have managed to obtain it?
For example, Mars or Aries in the 2nd could indicate an eagerness to amass money as well as the propensity to spend it rashly. There may be a tendency to associate how ‘macho’ one is with the capacity to earn wealth and acquire possessions. Money could be earned through professions associated with Mars – anything from working for the military establishment to ironmongery. Venus’ style in this house is very different – she may lure money to her rather than clamour after it and perceive wealth and riches as a way of augmenting her seductiveness and appeal. Money could be earned through professions associated with Venus – anything from the fine arts to working in the cosmetics department at Harrods. Liberace, the popular pianist who outrageously parades his wealth and extremes of taste, was born with Uranus in Pisces in the 2nd. Machiavelli, who believed that the end justified any means, was born with Mars in this house. Karl Marx, whose political and economic theories have changed history, was born with both the Sun and Moon in Taurus in the 2nd.
More broadly, 2nd house placements designate what we value and hope to gain in life. This is extremely crucial, because we base our whole existence on such criteria. When our values change, our whole life-focus can alter dramatically. In the 1960s, scores of executives abandoned their secure jobs and offices on Madison Avenue, stripped off their Brooks Brothers’ suits and donned their bell-bottoms in search of a new life in California – all because of a shift in values.
The 2nd house shows what we desire. Desire-energy is a mysterious and powerful force: in fact, what we desire, value or appreciate largely determines what we attract into our lives. There is an allegory pertaining to this principle. The people of a small town had such an enormous appreciation for a certain world-famous and acclaimed artist that they wrote to his agent to ask if this illustrious man would deign to visit their town. The agent replied in no uncertain terms that the famous artist had no time to spare to travel to such an insignificant municipality as theirs. Undismayed, the people there established study societies to explore more deeply the work, life and philosophy of their beloved artist, and they even commissioned a statue of him to be erected in the town centre. Eventually the artist heard of the overwhelming enthusiasm and love which these people felt for his work. Naturally, he grew curious enough to journey to this little town where all this fuss was being made over him. In the end, not only did he visit the town but he felt so welcomed there that he decided to make it his new home. Against all odds, the depth and quality of these people’s desire and appreciation for the artist had literally drawn him to them. Understood in this way, through valuing and appreciating the qualities associated with a planet which falls in the 2nd house, we are likely to create situations which draw this principle to us, or bring it to the fore. Transits and progressions to the 2nd house indicate those times of shifts and alterations to the desire-nature.
We all tend to form our sense of identity and security primarily from what we own, possess or attach to ourselves – be it the body, the home, the bank balance, the spouse, our children or a religious philosophy. However, deriving an identity from anything external or relative is ultimately precarious and conditional. Any of these could at any time be removed from us or suddenly lose their relevance. Even our body, which is the first thing we have labelled as our own and through which we gained our initial sense of ‘I’, must eventually be ‘let go of’ and sacrificed. Perhaps our only real security comesfrom an identification with that part of us which remains when everything else we thought we were is stripped away. To paraphrase Jung: we only discover what supports us when everything else we thought supported us doesn’t support us anymore.1It is worth reflecting on the wisdom of certain American Indian tribes which required that at the end of each year, the richest man in the village – the one who had successfully appropriated the most wealth to himself – gave away everything he had accrued.
Notes – Chapter 41. C. G. Jung,Psychology and Alchemy, Vol. 12, para. 32, Collected Works of Jung, Princeton, New Jersey, Princeton University Press.*Ego can be defined as ‘the centre of the field of consciousness’ (Jung’s definition). We are born into an ego-less state, because we are unconscious of existing as a separate entity. In the 2nd house, we become aware of our own distinct body; therefore it could be said that we have a body-ego. In the 3rd house, the mind differentiates from the body, and we develop a mental-ego. Once established, the boundaries of the ego can keep expanding.
