The Twelve Houses
5.THE THIRD HOUSE

We read the world wrong, and say that it deceives us.
Tagore

In the womb and for some months after birth, nothing is perceived as separate from ourselves – everything is seen as an extension of who we are. Eventually we become aware of our own distinct body. We discover its biological needs and wants and the kind of equipment we have been given to operate in the world to fulfil these. A sense of physical separateness from the mother develops and thereafter the sense of separateness from the rest of the environment. It is only when we have distinguished ourselves from the totality of life that we can actually begin to see and understand what there is around us, and enter into a relationship with what we find. Having established some awareness of our own boundary and shape, we can now explore the boundaries and shapes of other things. By the time we reach the 3rd house – the area of the chart associated with Mercury and Gemini – we are sufficiently evolved to examine the environment more closely, to interact with it, and to form ideas and opinions about what we meet.
Developmentally, the 3rd house corresponds to the stage in life when we begin to crawl and learn to walk. Provided that we feel reasonably secure (the feeling that ‘Mother is at home’) and with the stipulation that the environment is not too repressive, we naturally relish our greater independence and autonomy. Wewantto grow and explore. Akin to this is the development of language and the ability to communicate and name things. All this sounds like fun, and yet ironically our growing autonomy and our increasing facility to operate in the world confront us head on with a frustrating sense of our own inadequacy and smallness. There are things out there which are bigger than we are, which are scary and threatening; there are certain laws and limits – some things we are allowed to do or say, and are even praised for, while other things we do or say are reprehended with a scowl or firm slap. Welcome to the world of relativity! What a jigsaw puzzle! It is enough of a task to find all the pieces, let alone figure out how to put them together.
Most psychologists affirm that a true sense of individuality does not develop until language is learned: the typical noun-verb structure of most languages helps the growing child to distinguish subject from object, and in this way, the actor becomes separate from the action. (Little Johnny is not the ball, but he can throw the ball.) Accordingly, the child becomes more conscious of the self as a distinct entity – as a ‘doer’ or the one who is done to. Everything is no longer the same amorphous blob.1
Through language, the child also enters the world of symbols, ideas and concepts, and, for the first time, is able to imagine sequences of events beyond what is immediately available to the senses or the body. Attention can now be focused not just on what is present, but also on hypothetical and abstract qualities of existence. In short, with the advent of language, the mind (or mental self) frees and differentiates itself from the body.2
Third house
Traditionally, astrologers have associated the 3rd house with what is known as ‘the concrete mind’ and the 9th house (opposite the 3rd) with ‘the abstract mind’. Recent scientific investigation confirms what astrologers have always known – that the mind can be divided into two parts. Studies begun in the 1960s have demonstrated that the left and right sides of the brain correspond to different kinds of mental activity.3The ‘concrete mind’ of the 3rd house (in league with the Mercury-ruled 6th house) is analogous to the activities of the left side of the brain. This is the part of the brain which is concerned with rational and sequential thought, the fact-gathering aspect of the mind. The left brain controls that part of us that can talk about, analyse, pigeon-hole, compartmentalize and classify what we experience. Third house placements describe our mental style – how we think – but with particular reference to the left-brain functions. Is our mind slow, fast, logical or woolly? Are our thoughts original or do they usually reflect the thinking of those around us? Examine the 3rd house and find out.
Furthermore, planets and signs in the 3rd reveal our relationship or attitude to knowledge itself. For instance, a person with Mars in the 3rd may believe that knowledgeispower; but those with the Moon in this house may seek knowledge for the security it brings them, for the sense of safety and well-being they gain through mastering how something works.
As children, what we think about is mostly related to what we find in our immediate environment. Signs and planets in the 3rd house indicate what is ‘out there’ for us. However, as in the case of the Ascendant and 1st house, placements in the 3rd reveal our predisposition to perceive certain aspects of the environment and neglect or miss others. For example, those with Venus in the 3rd ‘drink’ Venus from the environment. They naturally imbibe the more harmonious and pleasing aspects of what is around them – those things which invite them to be congenial and harmonious in return. But those with Saturn there tend to perceive the more restrictive and colder aspects of the environment, and therefore, in their eyes, it is not a safe enough place in which to freely romp about. In this sense, placements in the 3rd describe both what we attribute to the immediate environment, as well as what we take away from it. ‘What you see is what youget.’ Both the chicken and the egg are alive and well and roosting in the 3rd house.
Some of the first things we might bump up against in the immediate environment are brothers and sisters. The 3rd house denotes our relationship with them as well as with uncles, aunts, neighbours, cousins and the like. (Obviously, mother and father are usually present as well, but they are so important that they each warrant other houses of their own.) Signs and planets in the 3rd signify the nature of the bond between us and a sibling, or these placements may be an apt description of the sibling – or at least those qualities we project onto him or her. For example, Saturn in the 3rd could mean that we experience difficulty and conflict in relating with a brother, or we see him as cold and unloving, or that we experiencethat part of uswhich is cold and unloving as coming from him. It is a common psychological precept that, one way or another, we manage to coerce others to ‘act out’ or ‘take on’ those aspects of our own psyche from which we are cut off. The impulse of life is towards wholeness, and if we are not living our wholeness then the outside will bring the missing elements to us. Energies in the 3rd house which we have not acknowledged as our own don’t just disappear – instead, they find someone or something else in the immediate environment through which to manifest.
Consultant astrologers will find it useful to question clients about early sibling relationships in the light of placements in the 3rd house. Where were they in terms of ordinal position – eldest, middle or youngest? Was there the feeling that a younger sibling usurped their central position in the family? Did an older sibling take out his or her frustration at being dethroned onto them? How competitive were siblings? Were boy children treated differently from girl children? Finally, issues relating to the death of siblings, either prior to or after one’s own birth, are extremely pertinent and more often than not are revealed in the chart. Patterns established with brothers and sisters early in life may repeat themselves with husbands, wives, co-workers, bosses and friends at a later stage of development.
The 3rd house also indicates something about the early schooling experience. School gives us a chance to see what we are like with other people besides our own family, and the opportunity to compare what our parents have told us with what others have to say. We also learn as much from our peers as we do from our teachers. Throughout childhood and early adolescence (the period of time traditionally associated with this house), we assimilate more and more information, which ultimately forms a code of practical rules and ‘truths’ by which we give order and meaning to life. How we fare during these tricky, formative years is shown by the 3rd house.
In mythology, Mercury (the natural ruler of the 3rd) was in charge of distributing information to and from the various gods. Likewise, all forms of communication – writing, speaking, the media, etc. – come under this house. The 3rd house mind draws connections between one field of study or branch of knowledge and another, and takes pleasure exploring all the myriad forms of life. Bits of information are gathered here and there, and usually some effort is made to perceive how the various parts fit into a larger whole.
The tone and colour of our experiences on short journeys (normally taken to mean within the country of residence) are ascribed to this house. In general, a planet in a house predisposes us to meet the principle it symbolizes on any of the different levels represented by the house: Saturn in the 3rd, for instance, could give problems with studies and/or with siblings and/or with short journeys. Whatever the outer manifestation, it is ultimately ‘symptomatic’ of a deeper, underlying issue – the desireto explore, discover, and relate to life (3rd house) is beset with fears and apprehension (Saturn) which are calling out to be examined and understood.
There is sometimes a correlation between having many planets in the 3rd and experiencing frequent changes of environment in the growing-up years. The effect of these moves on a person will vary according to the rest of the chart. Some will develop an exceptional flexibility and ease at fitting into different situations, while others might defend themselves against the pain of being wrenched away from established contacts by avoiding relating too deeply with anyone else. The latter attitude, unless faced and dealt with, could remain with them throughout their lives. Others might compensate for a disruptive childhood by later seeking a stable home at any cost.
Placements in the 3rd often correlate with professions such as teaching, writing, journalism, printing, media work, lecturing, selling, transport work, secretarial jobs and the like. Johnny Carson, reportedly one of the highest-paid American television chat show hosts, was born with the friendly conjunction of Moon and Jupiter in the 3rd. Hans Christian Andersen, the Danish writer whose fairy tales continue to enthral children of all ages, was born with the imaginative Venus in Pisces in the 3rd, along with the Sun and Mercury (in Aries). Lenny Bruce, the satirical comedian who upset many people by joking about what others considered taboo, was born with shocking Uranus in this house.
In conclusion, the 3rd house describes the context in which we view the immediate environment. It is advisable to remember thatcontent is a function of context:the way in which we perceive something determines how we will relate to it.
An Indian story makes this point nicely. A group is walking through a town just after sunset when they come upon what appears to be a snake on the ground in front of them. In terror, the alarm is raised, ambulances are summoned, and hospitals are put on alert in case of any mishap. Everyone else scurries back to the safety of their own house to hide. The sun rises as usual the next morning, and as the light dawns, they discover that what they thought was a snake was in actual fact only a long piece of string someone had discarded on the pavement. All that hubbub because of a piece of string.
Because we so often forget the part we play in constituting the world, it is useful to examine the 3rd house and assess the general context through which we are prone to interpret the immediate environment. Do we tend to see a snake or a piece of string? Becoming conscious of the preconceptions and attitudes that are suggested by the placements in this house ultimately makes it possible for us to work more creatively within their framework.
Notes – Chapter 51. Peter Russell,The Awakening Earth, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1983, p. 103.2. Wilber, p. 29.3. Marilyn Ferguson,The Aquarian Conspiracy, Granada, London, 1981, p. 81.
