The Twelve Houses

6.THE IMUM COELI AND THE FOURTH HOUSE
Who looks outside dreams; who looks inside wakes
.Jung

In the 1st house we are virtually unaware of ourselves in any objective sense. We justare.In the 2nd, we discover that we have our own shape and boundary which distinguishes us from everything else. In the 3rd, we turn our attention to what surrounds us, interacting with the other shapes and boundaries in our immediate environment to see what these are all about. By comparing what we are with what we come up against, we formulate even more opinions about ourselves. In the process, we lose the sense that we areeverything, but gain in return the feeling that we area someone– someone who inhabits a particular body, who thinks in a particular way, and who comes from a particular family background. As we approach the nadir of the chart – the IC and the 4th house – it’s time to pause and assimilate what we have learned. The task at hand is to gather our bits and pieces and integrate these around a central point, or ‘I’, which from now on will form the basis of our identity. Some people carry on gathering new bits of information all their lives and never pause to take root or consolidate at all (too much 3rd house and not enough 4th house). Others settle down and root too soon, before enough of life has been explored (too much 4th house and not enough 3rd).
It is not uncommon for people preoccupied with career and outer achievements in the world to be so active and busy with appointments and meetings that they hardly spend any time at home. Similarly, we all have a tendency to become so ‘caught up’ and identified with activity and external happenings that we neglect and lose touch with the ‘I’ that is there underneath it all. We are so engaged inwhatwe are seeing,whatwe are feeling, orwhatwe are doing, that we forget about the ‘I’ that is doing the seeing, having the feelings or performing the actions. What we encounter when we withdraw our awareness from the transitory objects of experience and reconnect with the underlying ‘I’, which is the subject of all experience, is designated by the sign on the IC (cusp of the 4th house in Quadrant systems) and the planets in the 4th.
The sense of a ‘me-in-here’ provided by the IC and 4th house lends an inner unity to all thoughts, feelings, perceptions and actions. In the same way that we are biologically self-maintaining and self-regulating, the IC and 4th house serve to maintain the individual characteristics of the self in a stable form.
The 4th house represents where we go when we settle back into ourselves – the inner centre where our ‘I’ returns to rest before launching into activity again. It is the base of operations from which we meet life. For this reason, the 4th house has been traditionally associated with the home, the soul and the roots of the being. The American Indians believed that you opened your soul to someone when you invited that person into your home. As opposed to our public face, the 4th house describes what we are like deep down inside. The Jungian analyst James Hillman describes soul as ‘that unknown component which makes meaning possible.’ The soul deepens events into experiencesand mediates between the doer and the deed. ‘Between us and events … there is a reflective moment – and soul-making means differentiating this middle ground.’1The subtle way a person turns events into experiences is shown by the IC and 4th house.Fourth house
The IC and 4th house signify the influence on us of our ‘family of origin’, the family into which we were born. Planets and signs in the 4th reveal the atmosphere we felt in that home, and the kind of conditioning or ‘scripting’ we received there – the psychological family inheritance. Delving even deeper, the 4th denotes qualities we carry stemming from our racial or ethnic origins: those aspects of the accumulated history and evolution of our race which reside within us. For example, Saturn in the 4th or Capricorn on the IC sometimes describes a home atmosphere which was felt as cold, strict or unloving, or a background of a long line of staunch conservatives; while Venus in the 4th or Libra on the IC will likely be more attuned to the love and harmony within the early home, and may feel an affinity and appreciation for the tradition out of which it has come. The Moon or Cancer there blend easily into the home environment, whereas Uranus or Aquarius in this position often feels like a stranger in a strange land, curiously wondering how it ‘ended up’ in that particular family. Marcel Proust, who inThe Remembrance of Things Pastexplored in unsurpassed detail his early life and innermost feelings, and the workings of memory itself, was born with the Sun, Mercury, Jupiter and Uranus all in Cancer in the 4th.
The influence parental figures have on us is normally attributed to the 4th-10th house axis. Traditionally it has always made sense to associate the 4th house (naturally ruled by the Moon and Cancer) with the Mother, and the 10th house (naturally ruled by Saturn and Capricorn) with the Father. Most astrologers were content with this classification, but the work of Liz Greene has shed some ambiguity in this area. She has found from her considerable experience and expertise as an astrological consultant that her clients’ descriptions of the relationship to their mothers seemed to correlate more closely with the 10th house, while the image of father worked better with the 4th.2
There are solid cases for and against both schools of thought. Since the 4th house is linked to Cancer and the Moon, then it would seem reasonable to assign it to the mother. Her womb was our original home, and in infancy we are more responsive tothe mother’s moods and feelings than to the father’s. The father is then connected to the 10th house, Saturn and Capricorn: after all, he is normally the breadwinner and the one out before the public, and it used to be the practice that the son followed the father’s profession. However, the opposing arguments are equally convincing. The Moon is not just mother; it is also our origins and we inherit our name from the father. In this way, he can be associated with the 4th house. The 10th house is much more obvious than the 4th, and the mother is much more obvious to the child than the father. The maternity of the child is a clear fact – up front and publicly recognizable like the 10th house. Paternity is more speculative, sometimes hidden and perhaps even a mystery and therefore maybe better correlated to the more hidden and mysterious IC point and the 4th house. Also, in Western society at least, the mother is usually the child’s prime socializing influence. She is the great ‘nay-sayer’ of childhood, the one with whom we spend the most time and whose role it is to watch over us and teach us the difference between what is good and acceptable and what is bad and not allowed. It is normally the mother who toilet-trains the child – the first major adjustment we have to make in order to conform to societal standards (Saturn, Capricorn and the 10th house).
I don’t believe that it is possible to fix a view that the 4th is always father and the 10th is always mother or vice versa. It is safer and perhaps more accurate to say that the ‘shaping parent’ – the one with whom the child spends the most time and who has the most influence on adapting the child to society – should be associated with the 10th house; and the more ‘hidden parent’, the one who is less visible and who is not so much of a known quantity, should be connected to the 4th house. In practice, after talking with a client the astrologer can formulate an educated guess as to which parent belongs to which house. For instance, if I ascertain that the client’s father is a Gemini with an Aquarius Moon and I find Gemini on the client’s IC and Uranus in the 4th house, it would seem likely that the 4th house, in this case, is an apt description of the father. Not all charts make it this easy, however.
It is important to remember that placements in the 4th (be it mother or father) may not describe the way the parent actually was as a person, but rather the way in which the child experienced the parent – what is known as theparent-imago,the child’sa prioriinborn image of the parent. Traditional psychology normally upholds the view that if something goes wrong between the parent and the child, it is the parent’s fault; by contrast, psychological astrology places at least half of the responsibility on the child for experiencing the parent in a particular way. For example (assuming the 4th house to be the father), a little girl with Saturn in the 4th will be most responsive to the Saturnine side of her father’s nature. He will probably exhibit many qualities other than those associated with that archetypal principle, but the child in question willselectivelyperceivemainly the Saturn traits. The father may be warm and kind seventy-five per cent of the time, but the twenty-five per cent for which he is cold and critical will be what the daughter registers.
More often that not there is a collusion between the parental image in the child’s chart and key placements in the chart of the parent. For instance, the chart of the girl’s father with Saturn in the 4th may show the Sun in Capricorn, Capricorn ascending, or a Sun-Saturn conjunction. However, even if her father’s chart is not that close a description of the placements in her 4th house, the predilection to see a parent in a particular way often has the effect of turning the person into what is being projected onto him. If she keeps reacting to her father as if he is an unkind person even when he is displaying loveand generosity, eventually he might become so frustrated that he turns sour towards her or gives up and avoids her altogether. And then the little girl says to herself, ‘The cad – I knew he was like that all along.’ But was he?
We are born with the bare bones of certain innate predispositions and expectations, but the experiences we have as children add layers upon layers of flesh to these. We interpret the environment in a certain way and then form concrete attitudes about ourselves and life ‘out there’ in general based on these perceptions. The little girl we have been discussing with Saturn in the 4th already has a few existential life-statements coming to the fore: ‘Father doesn’t love me’ and ‘Father is a cad’ to name but two. She will carry these inside her even after she has departed from the parental home where they will blossom into more full-blown attitudes such as, ‘Men find me unworthy and unlovable’ and ‘All men are cads’. Becoming conscious of the origins of these attitudes allows for the possibility of changing them, or finding other ways of organizing experience. Delving into the 4th house, which shows the archetypes activated in the early home life between ourselves and the parent in question, can greatly aid this process.
The 4th house, in addition to describing our inherited origins and that which resides deep within us, is associated with the home base in general. What kind of atmosphere do we create in the home? What do we attract to ourselves there? What qualities in the home environment do we most naturally resonate with? These questions can be answered by examining the planets and signs in the 4th.
T. S. Eliot writes that ‘in my beginning is my end.’ The 4th house depicts our origins but it is also associated with how we end things. The manner in which we ultimately resolve an issue or ‘enact a closure’ will be related to placements in the 4th. Venus there ends things neatly and fairly, all tied up in a pretty bundle. Saturn may prolong or begrudge an ending. The Moon and Neptune often slip away quietly and peacefully, while Mars and Uranus ‘go out with a bang’.
The 4th also suggests the conditions surrounding the second half of life. What is most deep within us comes out at the end. Many of us, after the age of forty, and perhaps moved by the death of a parent, will become increasingly aware of our mortality and conscious that there is less time to waste. On this basis, we may willingly make more space in our lives to express and vent our innermost needs and feelings. Furthermore, sheer experience of life is a prerequisite for self-discovery, so it is not surprising that our deepest and most intimate motivations may not emerge until the later years. One extreme illustration of this is the death-bed confession, in which people dramatically disclose truths about themselves which they have kept guarded for decades.
Psychotherapy, self-reflection, various forms of meditation – anything which takes us into ourselves – bring 4th house energies to the surface and can make these moreconsciouslyavailable to ourselves earlier in life. Rather than neglecting what’s down there, it is advisable to deal with difficult placements in this house sooner rather than later. The 4th house, like our past, always catches up with us.
Notes – Chapter 61. James Hillman,Re-Visioning Psychology, Harper Colophon Books, Harper & Row, 1975, p. IX.2. Liz Greene,Relating, Coventure Ltd, London, 1977, pp. 201-2.
