The Twelve Houses

8.THE SIXTH HOUSE
A monk told Joshu: ‘I have just entered the monastery. Please teach me.’
Joshu asked: ‘Have you eaten your rice porridge?’
The monk replied: ‘I have eaten.’
Joshu said: ‘Then you had better wash your bowl.’
A Zen story

The main problem with the 5th house is a tendency to ‘go over the top’. We delight in self-expression, but we don’t know when to stop. In the 5th house we no longer believe weareeverything, but we still think we canbeordoanything. The 6th house follows the 5th and reminds us of our natural boundaries and the need for clearer self-definition. Like the philosophy of Zen, the 6th house asks that we respect and regain the ‘perfection of our original nature’,1that we become what we alone are (no more, no less), and that we live this in our everyday lives. Our true vocation is to be ourselves.

The 6th house shakes a finger at the 5th and retorts:Very well, it’s wonderful to give expression to your creative flair, but have you really done it that cleverly? That painting is not quite right yet and you’ve exhausted yourself staying up two nights working on it.orSure, you are having quite a sizzling romance, but have you examined the practicalities of this as a long-term relationship – not to mention the fact you can’t stand the after-shave he wears?orCongratulations, you’ve had a baby girl. Now adjust your schedule and life to her and keep those clean nappies coming.orRemember that party last week where you really let yourself go? When you look back, don’t you think you might have offended that shy boy in the corner who didn’t even have a chance to speak because you monopolized the conversation?
The time has come to take stock of ourselves, to discriminate between priorities, to assess the use we are making of our power and capabilities, and above all, to recognize the limits and truth of our own nature and humanity.
Try as it may, a pear seed can never become an apple tree. Nor should it, if we believe as Kierkegaard did, that ‘to will to be the self which one truly is, is indeed the oppositeof despair.’2The 6th house is all about sticking to our plan and blossoming into precisely what we are meant to be. Doing this feels right and good. But the consequences for not respecting the truths of our own nature are stress, frustration and dis-ease: messengers telling us that something is awry and needs to be examined.Sixth house
‘Reality has both a “within” and a “without”.’3The 6th house explores the relationship between what we are inside and what surrounds us on the outside – the correlation between the inner world of mind and feelings and the outer world of form and the body. The traditional 6th house labels, ‘health, work, service, and adjustment to necessity’, all stem from thisbodymind connection.
It is a basic fact of existence that life has to be lived within boundaries. No matter how divine or wonderful we think we are, we still have to eat, brush our teeth, pay bills and cope with the necessities of everyday, mundane reality. Furthermore, each of us has a particular body, a particular mind, and some particular task to perform. We are ‘designed’ in a certain way to serve a purpose or function specified in our own individual make-up and nature. Nobody can fulfil that purpose better than ourselves. We serve best by being who we are. Through the necessary adjustments and refinements of the 6th house, we become what we alone can be.
Somebody once said that ‘work is the rent we pay for life’. For many of us, work is somethingwe have to doin order to support daily existence. Daily employment also implies routine and adjustment. We have to arrive there more or less on time, and we cannot be as free and spontaneous as we might like with our lives if we know the alarm clock is set to ring at seven the next morning. We have to structure our time, establish priorities, and make dispensations. In one way, the need to follow a rigid schedule helps to order and pattern life. We escape the existential anxiety which freedom of choice might provoke: we have a job and we know where we must be.
Ideally,however, the work-force is composed of varied individuals each performing the particular skills they have developed best. The end result is a perfectly finished product or the maintenance of the proper functioning of society. Planets and signs in the 6th describe issues relating to work and employment, and suggest the tasks that we can potentially do most well. Placements in this house may reveal the nature of our jobs –Jupiter or Sagittarius could be a travel agent, the Moon or Cancer look after children, and Neptune or Pisces draw pints at the local pub. But much more than describing the type of employment, the placements here suggest the way in which we approach (or should approach) doing the job – not justwhatwe do, buthowwe do it. For instance, those with Saturn or Capricorn here may prefer a stable job with clearly defined requirements, at which they can work slowly and steadily; while those with Uranus and Aquarius in this house normally hate to punch a clock and would much rather work without a boss looking over them.
The nature of relationships with co-workers is also shown by 6th house placements. Venus or Libra here may fall in love with someone at work, while Pluto or Scorpio stirs up intrigues and complex encounters. The 6th house is ‘naturally squared’ the 3rd (see page 97) and ‘unfinished business’ around sibling and early peer relationships may resurface with co-workers.
Through employment situations, we find ourselves in relationships of inequality. Thirty people may be working under us, and we may, in turn, be subordinate to thirty others. How we cope with dispensing authority, and how we manage in the more subservient position is shown by the 6th. It is a kind of rehearsal for the relationships of equality we form in the 7th house.
The 6th house also describes our relationship to the mechanic who works on our car, our doctor and his or her receptionist, the milkman – in fact anyone who is serving us in some way. Conversely, our own qualities as ‘a server’ and our deeper feelings and attitudes regarding service are shown by placements here. This is not to be taken lightly, as many people view humility and service as the pinnacle of human endeavour – as the path to God and more enlightened states of being.
The way we use our time and the kind of atmosphere we need in order to function happily in daily life is shown by the 6th. Signs and planets in this house colour the energies we bring (or should bring) into everyday tasks and how we approach the rituals of mundane existence. Mars in the 6th may clean the house like a ‘white tornado’, while Neptune is still trying to remember where it left the mop.
Pets – who are around us in our everyday life – are also assigned to the 6th house. This may seem a trivial consideration and yet a good number of people are profoundly affected by their experience of caring for animals. Pets can be the ‘hook’ for any variety of projections and for some people their relationship to their dog or cat is as important as with any human. In certain cases, pets assuage what would otherwise be an unbearable sense of loneliness or feelings of uselessness. The loss or death of a beloved animal can trigger many psychological and philosophical issues.
There is an obvious relation between work and health – the other major concern of the 6th house. Although the dominant work ethic of Western culture may seem extreme or easily abused, nonetheless the need to be productive and useful is somehow basic to human nature. Overwork strains the health, while too little work can leave us listless and lethargic. Redundancy not only deprives us of a source of income, but also a source of a sense of worth and purpose. Studies have shown that the number of reported illnesses increases in areas where the unemployment rate is rising. Conversely, some people will use illness as a way of escaping from a job they hate or which doesn’t suit them.
The 6th house concern for craftsmanship, perfection and technical proficiency applies to issues of health as well as work. Optimally the body is a finely tuned mechanismwhere the different cells work for the good of the larger organism. Each cell is an entity in itself and yet each one is part of a larger system. Each cell must ‘do its thing’ but each must also submit to the demands of the greater whole. In a healthy person (as in a healthy society) each individual component asserts itself and yet works in harmony with the other components. The 6th house asks that we bring our different parts – that is, our mind, body and feelings – into a harmonious working relationship.
Many individuals with 6th house placements are especially interested in health and fitness, some to an obsessive degree. In extreme cases, special diets and techniques for maintaining the optimal functioning of the body dominate and structure the life, leaving little time for anything else. However, many excellent healers have a 6th house emphasis, and it can be associated with traditional medicine as well as careers in homoeopathy, osteopathy, herbalism, massage, etc.
It has already been mentioned that the body, mind and emotions operate as a unit. What we think and feel will affect the body. Conversely, the state of the body will influence how we think and feel.Psyche(mind) andsoma(body) are inextricably linked. Physiological and chemical imbalances give rise to psychological problems, while emotional and mental turmoil can manifest in physical symptoms. The 6th house may reveal something about the underlying psychological significance of certain illnesses. Saturn could indicate a rigidity in meeting everyday life, as well as arthritis. Mars in the 6th rushes into life, works itself to a frazzle, only to be diagnosed later with high blood-pressure. However, it is an over-simplification to refer to the 6th house only in relation to health.The American Book of Nutrition and Medical Astrologyby Eileen Naumann (published by Astro Computing Services, San Diego, California) examines medical astrology in great depth, and is highly recommended.
Through 6th house issues we refine, perfect and purify ourselves, and ultimately become a better ‘channel’ for being who we are. We could be the most wonderfully inspired artist (5th house) but unless we learn the tools of the craft (6th house) – the right use of brushes, paints and canvas – we won’t be able to concretize or realize our possibilities. It has been said that ‘technique is the liberation of the imagination’. These are true watchwords for the 6th house.
We embark on life unconscious of our unique individuality and by the end of the 6th house we have a much more defined sense of our own particular identity and purpose. Like the 3rd house, the 6th house employs the left-brain activity of reducing things to parts. The problem with the 6th is that we end up seeing the worldtoo muchin terms of ‘what is me’ and ‘what is not me’. When we characterize ourselves by those features which distinguish us from others – our weight, height, skin colour, job, car, house – we are left with the feeling that there is an absolute distinction between who we are and who other people are. While it is the purpose of the first six houses to make us more fully aware of ourselves as separate individuals, it remains for the last six houses (the 7th to the 12th) to reunite us with others again. Otherwise life is awfully lonely.
Notes – Chapter 81. Fritjof Capra,The Tao of Physics, Fontana/Collins, England, 1981, p. 127.2. Søren Kierkegaard cited in Rowan, p. 62.3. Pierre Teilhard de Chardin cited in Ferguson, p. 201.
