The Twelve Houses

10.THE EIGHTH HOUSE
If my devils are to leave me, I am afraid my angels will take flight as well.
Rilke

The 8th house has many labels. Since it is opposite the 2nd house, which is ‘my values’, it is commonly called ‘the house of other people’s values’. This can be taken quite literally. Signs and planets in the 8th suggest how we fare financially in marriage, inheritance or business partnerships. For instance, Jupiter there may marry into money, receive a good windfall through a legacy, escape lightly from the tax inspector, and form beneficial business associates. A poorly aspected Saturn in the 8th, on the other hand, may marry someone who declares bankruptcy the next day, inherit its next-of-kin’s unpaid debts, be scrupulously investigated by the tax inspector, and choose disastrous business partners. Nor is it unusual to find people with many planets in the 8th in careers involving other people’s money: bankers, stockbrokers, investment analysts and accountants.
However, the 8th house is much more than just other people’s money. It describes ‘that which is shared’ and the manner in which we fuse or unite with others. Elaborating and expanding on what has begun in the 7th, the 8th house is the nitty-gritty of relationships: what happens when two people – each with his or her own temperament, resources, value system, needs and biological clock – attempt to merge. A whole plethora of questions and conflicts are apt to ensue:I have some money and you have some money. How shall we spend it? How much shall we try to save each month?orI like sex three times a week and you seem to need it every night. Who wins?orYou believe that to spare the rod is to spoil the child, but I insist that no child of mine is to be hit. Who’s right?orI don’t know how you can be friends with that couple. They really irritate me. I’d rather we visit my friends tonight. Whose friends do they end up visiting?
The aisle intended to lead to the path of wedded bliss seems to have forked into a raging battlefield and there is what looks like a funeral procession up ahead.
The 8th house, naturally associated with Pluto and Scorpio, is also labelled ‘the house of sex, death and regeneration’. In the myth, the maiden Persephone is abducted intothe underworld by Pluto, the god of Death. She marries him there and returns to the upper world a changed person, no longer a little girl but a woman. Relating deeply with another person entails a kind of death, the letting go and breaking down of our ego-boundaries and tightly knit identity. We die as a separate ‘I’ and are reborn as ‘We’.Eighth house
Like Persephone, through relationship we are plunged into another’s world. In sex and intimacy, we expose and share parts of ourselves which are normally kept hidden. Sex can be considered just a release which temporarily makes us feel better; or through the sexual act, we may experience a form of self-transcendence, a union with another self. In the heights of ecstasy, we forget and abandon ourselves to merge with another. The Elizabethans referred to the orgasm as ‘the little death’. Much about our sexual nature is shown by placements in the 8th.
Relationships are the catalysts for change. The 8th house cleanses and regenerates through drawing to the surface (usually via a present relationship) unresolved issues from previous relationships, especially early bonding problems with mother and father. The first relationship in our life, that with the mother or mother-substitute, is the most highly charged. This is not surprising as our survival depends on her. We areallborn into this world potential victims: unless there is the caring love and protection of someone bigger and more adept than us, our chances of survival are very slim. The loss of a mother’s love does not simply mean the loss of a person close to us: it could mean abandonment and death. Many of us continue to project these same infantile concerns onto later relationships. The fear that our partner doesn’t love us anymore or is possibly betraying us will trigger or reawaken the primal fears of the loss of the original love-object. It then feels as if our very survival depends on the preservation of the present relationship. Pleas and outcries such as ‘If you leave me, I’ll die’ and ‘I can’t live without you’ reveal the charged undercurrents from early bonding difficulties infiltrating the reality of the current situation. True, as children we might have died if Mother left, but more likely than not, as adults we are quite capable of managing our own survival needs. Through exposing these unresolved and hidden fears, the trials and tribulations in the 8th house help us to shed attitudes which are obsolete and cumbersome. Not every partner is our mother.
In addition to our irrational fears, a good proportion of the anger and outrage we sometimes feel and unleash on our partner can be ‘tracked back’ to infancy and childhood. Children are not all sweetness, ‘goo’ and light. The work of the psychologist Melanie Klein has depicted another side to the baby’s nature. Because of its extreme helplessness, the small child experiences enormous frustration when his or her needs are not being understood and met. Even the most adept mother cannot always interpret precisely what a screaming baby wants, and invariably the child’s frustration erupts into violent hostility. Since early experiences leave such a deep impression, all of us have a ‘raging infant’ buried inside. A present partner thwarts us in some way and the screaming child may be awakened yet again.
Like Persephone’s abduction into the underworld, in very intense relationships we descend into the depths of our being to discover our primordial instinctual inheritance: the envy, greed, jealousy, rage, seething passions, the need for power and control as well as the destructive fantasies which may lurk beneath the most genteel façade. It is only through recognizing and accepting ‘the beast’ in us that it can be transformed. We cannot change anything we don’t know is there. We cannot transform something we condemn. The darker side of our nature must be brought to light before we can be cleansed, regenerated or born again.
Previously, in denying this darker side we may have stifled a vast reservoir of psychic energy. However, acknowledging our vindictiveness, cruelty, or ragedoes notnecessarily mean catharting or ‘acting out’ these emotions indiscriminately. Such behaviour expends the energy and possibly destroys much more than we wish. Rather, the key lies in ‘owning’ and yetcontainingthese explosive feelings. Through reconnecting to the fount of energy expressing itself as outraged instincts and holding on to it inside us, we eventually release this energy from the form in which it has been trapped. Thus diverted, it can be consciously integrated back into the psyche more productively or  channelled into constructive outlets. Stewing in the juices of primal emotion until they are ready to shift is not very pleasant, but who has ever said that the 8th house is easy?
The 8th house yields the opportunity to re-examine the connection between present relationship issues and those problems encountered with the mother and father early in life. Based on our perception of the environment as children, we form opinions about what kind of person we are and what life ‘out there’ is like for us. These beliefs or ‘scripts’ continue to operate, often unconsciously, far into adulthood. The little girl who believed that ‘father was a cad’ grows into the woman with a deeply ingrained sense that ‘all men are cads’. Due to the laws of psychic determinism, we have a mysterious and uncanny ability to attract into our lives the very people and situations which support these early assumptions. If not, we will probably perceive them that way in any case. The aim of a complex is to prove itself true.
The ruins and rubble from childhood are excavated in the 8th house. Our more problematic and deeper existential life-statements are uncovered ‘alive and kicking’ in present relationship crises. With the added maturity and wisdom that years of living bestow on us, we can ‘clean up’ some of the residue from the past, which has coloured and obscured our perspective on life, ourselves and others. The gift of the 8th house is greater self-knowledge and self-mastery, freeing us to continue our journey renewed, less encumbered by unnecessary baggage.
Should we fail at attempts at merging and ‘working through’ the volatile issues which the 8th house evokes, then we can refer to placements here to gain a sense of what the divorce proceedings might be like. Difficult planetary aspects to the 8th warn of traumatic separations and ‘messy’ divorce settlements. The two ‘raging infants’ and their respective lawyers are left to carry out the battle in the courtroom.
All levels of shared experience are described by the 8th house. In addition to the realm of joint finance and the merging of two individuals into one, this house has a broader ecological slant. We all have to share our planet and its resources. The high-powered entrepreneur who indiscriminately levels forests for his own profit is disregarding the inhabitants of the forest, as well as depriving a fellow human being of an area of natural beauty and inspiration. A person’s sensitivity to these issues will be mirrored by placements in the 8th.
The house also denotes our relationship to what esoteric philosophers call ‘the astral plane’. A strong emotion, though not necessarily visible, will nonetheless pervade the atmosphere around us. The astral plane is that level of existence where seemingly intangible but powerful emotions and feelings collect and circulate. The more rationally minded may doubt the credibility of something which cannot be seen or measured. And yet, almost all of us have had the experience of entering one person’s home and feeling immediately ‘hit’ by something unpleasant, while walking into another person’s house and feeling uplifted and spirited. Planets and signs in the 8th show the particular kinds of energies ‘hovering’ in the astral realm to which we are most sensitive. Someone with Mars in the 8th will more easily ‘pick up on’ anger in the atmosphere than someone with Venus there who quickly senses when ‘love is in the air’. In this capacity, the watery 8th house is akin to the other water houses, the 4th and the 12th. Experiences of the psychic or occult sphere are shown in the 8th, as well as the degree of interest or fascination we have for that which is hidden, mysterious or underlying the surface level of existence.
Death, as shown by placements in the 8th, can be taken literally to mean the manner or extenuating circumstances of our physical death. Saturn there may be reluctant to die, fearful of what lies beyond corporeal existence. Neptune may die from drugs, alcohol poisoning or drowning, or gradually disengage itself in a coma. Uranus may end it all rather suddenly.
However, in the span of one lifetime, we experience many different psychological deaths. If we have been deriving our identity from a particular relationship and it should finish, then this is a kind of death of who we have been. Likewise, if we have gained our sense of vitality or meaning in life from a certain profession and then are made redundant, we also die as we knew ourselves. Childhood dies and adolescence is born. Adolescence passes and we die into adulthood. A birth requires a death; and a death requires a birth. Signs and planets in the 8th indicate the manner in which we meet such phase transitions. Individuals with a strong 8th house slant often experience their lives as a book containing many different chapters, or a long play with distinct changes of scene. These endings and new beginnings may be thrust on us or we might assume a more active role in tearing down old structures to make room for something else.
In mythology, the gods create the world, decide they don’t like it, destroy what they have built, and create another. Death is an ongoing process in nature. There is also the image of the dying and reviving god, who is destroyed in one form but then reappearsagain transformed. Christ is crucified and then resurrected. Dionysus is dismembered, but Athene, the goddess of Wisdom, rescues his heart and he is born again. Like the Phoenix, we may temporarily be reduced to ashes, but we can rise once more, renewed. Form can be destroyed, but essence remains to flourish again in some other form. The German poet Goethe wrote, ‘So long as you do not die and rise again, you are a stranger to the dark earth.’ On some deep level, any survivor of the 8th house’s traumas and tensions knows this.

