The Twelve Houses

13.THE ELEVENTH HOUSE
In the heaven of Indra, there is said to be a network of pearls, so arranged, that if youlook at one you see all the others reflected in it.
A Hindu Sutra

From being oblivious of being anybody, to winning recognition as a somebody: this has been the route from the 1st house to the 10th house. But now that the ego has been firmly established and duly acknowledged, what happens next?
At its deepest level, the 11th house (associated with the sign of Aquarius and co-ruled by Saturn and Uranus) represents the attempt to go beyond our ego-identity and become something greater than what we already are. The main way of achieving this is to identify with something larger than the self – such as a circle of friends, a group, a belief system or an ideology.
According to General Systems Theory, nothing can be understood in isolation but must be comprehended as part of a system. The components of the system and their attributes are viewed as functions of the total system. The behaviour and expression of each variable influences and is influenced by all the others. In what is known as a ‘high synergy’ society, the goals of the individual are in harmony with the needs of the system as a whole. In a ‘low synergy’ system, the individuals, in fulfilling their own needs, do not necessarily act for the good of the whole.1How we function as part of a system is shown by the 11th house.
In keeping with its dual rulership, the concept of group consciousness implied by the 11th can be understood in two distinct ways. Saturn seeks greater security and a more solid sense of identity through belonging to a group – what psychologists label ‘belonging-identification’. Being a member of a particular group, whether it is a social, national, political or religious group, enhances the sense of who we are and gives a feeling of safety in numbers. To some extent, this is exploitive, since the rest of the world is used in the service of augmenting or bolstering the identity. Evidence of this is most clearly seen in those who are overly concerned with having the ‘right’ friends, being noticed in the ‘right’ places, and aligning the self with the ‘right’ beliefs.2The most negative face of this Saturn undercurrent of the 11th manifests when a group is threatened by another group – such as blacks moving into a white area, or Jungians moving into a predominantly Freudian neighbourhood.
The Uranian side of the 11th house represents the kind of group consciousness which spiritual teachers, mystics and visionaries from all different cultures and times have repeatedly espoused. Instead of the typical ‘me-in-here’ versus ‘you-out-there’ paradigm or self-model, they speak of the individual’s unity with all of life, that we are part of a greater whole, interconnected with the rest of creation. Mirroring the mystical perception of the unity of all life, recent scientific breakthroughs demonstrate the web of relationship underlying everything in the universe. For instance, David Bohm, a British physicist, theorizes that the universe must be understood as ‘a single undivided whole in which separate and independent parts have no fundamental status.’3A thorough analysis of the parallels between modern physics and Eastern mysticism isfound inThe Tao of Physicsby Fritjof Capra, an eminent researcher in high-energy physics. Some of the parallels he recounts are so striking that it is almost impossible to determine whether certain statements about the nature of life have been made by modern scientists or by Eastern mystics.4Eleventh house
One recent theory proposed by a British plant physiologist, Rupert Sheldrake, is particularly relevant to the 11th house. Sheldrake suggests the possibility of invisible organizing fields which regulate the life of a system. In 1920, William McDougall of Harvard University was studying how quickly rats learned to escape from a maze filled with water; meanwhile, other researchers in Scotland and Australia who were repeating these experiments found that their first generation of rats, bred from a different strain to the McDougall rats, performed the task with the same degree of ability as McDougall’s last generation. The skill was in some way ‘picked up on’ by other rats even though they were in another part of the world. Such occurrences have led Sheldrake to theorize that if one member of a biological species learns a new behaviour, the invisible organizing field (morphogenetic field) for that species changes. The rats who mastered the task made it possible for other rats, many miles away, to do the same.5On some deep level, we are all linked together. Sheldrake’s theory is nicely summed up in a remark once made by the Jesuit priest Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, born with Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn in the 11th: ‘A truth once seen, even by a single mind, always ends by imposing itself on the totality of human consciousness.’6
InThe Aquarian Conspiracy, Marilyn Ferguson writes, ‘You cannot understand a cell, a rat, a brain structure, a family or a culture if you isolate it from its context.’7Similarly, Carl Rogers, one of the founders of humanistic psychology, once remarked that the deeper the individual delves into his or her own identity the more he or she discovers the whole human race. Our identity has a much wider membership than the ‘skin-encapsulated ego’ is capable of admitting. In this light, the development of group consciousness as seen in the 11th house is not solely for the purpose of aggrandizing or bolstering the ego-identity. Rather, the awareness of being part of something larger enables us to transcend the limits and boundaries of individual separateness and experience ourselves as a cell in the larger body of humanity. Out of this realizationgrows a sense of brotherhood and sisterhood with the co-inhabitants of the planet far beyond the obligatory ties of family, nation or church.
Syntropy – the tendency of life-energy to move towards greater association, communication, co-operation and awareness – is the main principle upon which the 11th house operates. Having recognized ourselves as separate and distinct individuals there is the call to reconnect with everything from which we have previously differentiated ourselves. Just as matter organized itself into living cells, and living cells gathered together into multi-cellular organisms, it may be that at some stage human beings will integrate themselves into some form of global super-organism. Even on a Saturnian level, the interdependence and interconnectivity of life on the planet is becoming increasingly obvious. Communications technology has dramatically enhanced the speed of global interaction and Marshall McLuhan’s concept of the world as a ‘global village’ is near to being an actuality. Multinational corporations and conglomerates link the economies of the world inextricably together. The collapse of the monetary system of one country would have a disastrous rippling effect on a host of others. Isolationism and nationalism are no longer practically viable. On another level, small groups, networks, movements and support systems are proliferating all over the world, gathering people together to promote common causes. In short, much in the same way that our own body changes and develops, the larger body of humanity is also growing and evolving. The way in which we might participate in and serve the evolution and progress of this collective Self is shown by placements in the 11th house.
In the 5th house, our energy is used to distinguish ourselves from others, and to augment the sense of our own individual worth and specialness; in the 11th, our energy can be invested in promoting and fulfilling the identity, purpose and cause of any group to which we belong – whether this is understood to be the whole human race or a particular segment of it. In the 5th, we do what we want to do for our own sake. In the 11th, we may choose to relinquish or compromise some of our precious personal urges, inclinations and idiosyncrasies for the sake of adhering to what the group decides is best.
Social consciousness is a keynote of the 11th. A society (10th house) is structured on certain laws and principles (9th house). Laws and society easily become both crystallized and turgid, and invariably certain elements of society are favoured by the system while others are oppressed. Groups which feel neglected or betrayed by the existing laws can find a voice through the kinds of reforms associated with the 11th house. Often, those with strong placements here work through humanitarian or political groups to implement needed social changes. However, it is just as common to find others with an 11th house emphasis jockeying back and forth from one social engagement to the next – Ascot this week, Centre Court at Wimbledon the next, and then a day at Henley before going off to the opera at Glyndebourne.
In some cases, placements in the 11th may signify the sorts of groups towards which we gravitate. For instance, Neptune could be interested in music societies, spiritualist or psychic groups; Uranus with astrology groups; and Mars with the local rugby club. However, rather than just describing the type of group, it is more likely that signs and planets in the 11th symbolize our style of behaving and interacting in group situations. The Sun or Leo there may have to be the leader, deriving a good proportion of its worth and identity from group involvement. Mercury or Gemini in this house might appear as the secretary of the group or as one of its most clever spokespeople. Someone has tomake the tea, and the Moon or Cancer there may be happy to provide not only these services but its home as a meeting place as well. Furthermore, the 11th house gives a sense of how comfortable we feel in group situations. Venus or Libra may blend in easily and make many new friends through joining a group. Saturn or Capricorn is more likely to hold back in the group, and feel awkward or lumpish mixing with the others. Oscar Wilde, who rose to the heights of success in London’s artistic and social circles, had the Moon in Leo in the 11th. Paul Joseph Goebbels, the official propagandist of the Nazi party who controlled public communications and the media, had Pluto conjunct Neptune in Gemini in this house.
Friendship clearly fits into the 11th house ideal of becoming greater than what we already are. People are linked together through friendship, personal boundaries are expanded, and both the needs and resources of others become interwoven with our own. We introduce our friends to new ideas and interests and, likewise, we are broadened by what they have to share.
Planets and signs in the 11th often describe the kinds of friends to whom we gravitate. For example, a man with Mars in this house may be attracted to those people who exhibit obvious Martian qualities, such as dynamism, drive and directness. However, placements in the 11th may also show those qualities in ourselves which we ‘dis-own’, project outwardly and meet externally through friends. If the man with Mars in the 11th has not developed his own ‘Mars’ side, and lacks that certain ‘get up and go’, his friends will then provide that energy for him – they stimulate and push him into action. He may even possess an uncanny ability to evoke such qualities in his close associates, who in most other situations and with other people might be normally more placid and withdrawn.
The 11th house also suggests the way in which we make friends. Mars could rush impulsively into friendship, while Saturn is more awkward, shy or cautious in this respect. How we behave and what energies we awaken in friendship is also shown by placements here. Venus may make friends easily but prefers to keep things light (although she may expect friends to ‘live up to’ rather high ideals). Pluto suggests intense and complicated associations which significantly transform us or in which issues of betrayal, intrigue and treachery come into play.
In the 11th house, there is the desire to transcend or move beyond existing images and models of ourselves. We yearn for a more ideal self or a more utopian society. Therefore, this area of the chart has been labelled the house of hopes, goals, wishes and objectives. The desire to become something greater than we are must be accompanied by the capacity to envision new and different possibilities. More than any other species, the large human brain and evolved cerebral cortex endow human beings with the capacity to imagine a wide range of alternatives, choices and outcomes. The manner in which we envision possibilities and proceed toward realizing these hopes and wishes is shown by placements in the 11th. For instance, Saturn there may have difficulty in forming positive images of the future or may encounter blocks, delays or obstructions on the way to finally grounding its goals and objectives. Mars sets a goal and rushes after it, while Neptune may be confused about what it really wants or merely fantasizes and daydreams about unrealistic aims. In this context, it is helpful to remember that the more clearly we can imagine a possibility, the closer we bring it to actualization. Encouraging positive visions of the future aids the process of moving in a more positive direction.
Evolution pushes towards greater and greater levels of complexity, organization and connectivity. In the first air house (the 3rd) we gain the ability through language to distinguish subject from object. Our own mind is developed as we relate to others in the immediate environment. In the second air house (the 7th) we grow through the close encounter of our own awareness with another person’s awareness. Subject and object, differentiated in the 3rd, meet face to face in the 7th. In the last air house (the 11th) our individual minds are connected not just to the minds of those close to us but to all other minds. Eleventh house planets sensitize a person to the ideas and thoughts circulating on the level of the group-mind. It is not such an unusual phenomenon for somebody in San Francisco, somebody in London, and another person in Japan to ‘flash’ on the same bright new idea independently of one another within a relatively close span of time. In the 11th, we discover our relatedness not just to our family, friends, country or loved ones, but to the whole human race.
Notes – Chapter 131. Russell, p. 13.2. Russell, pp. 106-7.3. Russell, p. 127.4. Capra, p. 17.5. Russell, pp. 174-5.6. Pierre Teilhard de Chardin cited in Ferguson, p. 52.7. Russell, p. 82.

