The Twelve Houses

14.THE TWELFTH HOUSE
If the doors of perception were cleansed, everything would appear to man as it is, infinite.
William Blake

Commencing with the 1st house, growth has entailed distinguishing ourselves from the unbounded and universal matrix of life out of which we first emerged. However, as we have seen in the 11th, the distinction between ourselves and others is challenged by the understanding that each part of a system is related and interconnected with the other parts. Mystics and scientists alike tell us that we are not so separate after all. Who we are is influenced by others, and others are influenced by who we are. Our minds are linked and directly affected by one another. The notion that we exist as an isolated entity is quickly losing ground to a more collective or broader sense of self. In the 12th house, the twin processes of the dissolution of the individual ego and the merging with something greater than the self is felt and experienced, not via the mind or intellect as in the 11th, but with our heart and soul. Or as Christopher Fry puts it, ‘The human heart can go to the lengths of God.’
The poet Walter de la Mare writes that ‘our dreams are tales told in a dim Eden.’ On its most underlying level, the 12th house, naturally associated with watery Pisces and the planet Neptune, represents the urge for dissolution which exists in each of us – the yearning to return to the undifferentiated waters of the womb, to the original state of unity. Freud, Jung, Piaget, Klein and a host of other modern psychologists agree that the infant’s first structure of consciousness is pre-subject/object, ignorant of boundaries, space and time. Early memories cut the most deeply. On some deep level, every individual intuits that his or her innermost nature is unbounded, infinite and eternal. The rediscovery of this wholeness is our greatest need and want. From a reductionist psychology perspective, the desire to reconnect with the lost sense of original wholeness can be understood as a regression back to the pre-birth state; but in spiritual terms, this same urge translates into a mystical longing for union with our source and a direct experience of being part of something greater than ourselves. It is a kind of divine homesickness.1
In one respect, the prospect of a return to that state sounds blissful, ecstatic and serenely peaceful. And yet, something else in us – the ego’s desire to preserve itself and the fear of its own demise – contends with this longing. The ego has fought hard to win a slice of life for itself: why should it relinquish this? In the glyph of Pisces, the sign associated with the 12th house, two fishes swim in opposite directions. Human beings are faced with a fundamental dilemma, with two contrasting pulls. Each person wants to lose a sense of isolation and transcend his or her individual separateness and yet each person is terrified of disintegration and dreads the loss of the separate self.2This existential double bind – wanting wholeness and yet fearing and resisting it – is the major predicament of the 12th house.
Because the dissolution of the ego-identity is so frightening, people seek substitute gratifications in an attempt to satisfy the yearning for self-transcendence. One strategy for reconnecting to unity is through sex and love: ‘If I am loved, held or included, thenI go beyond my separateness.’ Another ploy to regain a lost sense of omnipotence and omnipresence is through wielding power and prestige: ‘If I can extend my territory of influence over more and more things, then the rest of life is connected to me.’ Immersion in alcohol or drugs is another way to break down boundaries and rigidities. Suicidal urges and various other forms of self-destructive behaviour often cloak the desire to return to a more blissful state of non-differentiated being. Others seek transcendence more directly through meditation, prayer and devotion to God. The 12th house may raise any of these issues.Twelfth house
However it is approached, the 12th house ‘de-structures’, engulfs, absorbs or inflates individual identity. Letting go of the ‘me-in-here’ versus ‘you-out-there’ paradigm means that the borders between ourselves and others become blurred. For this reason, a strong emphasis on this house can indicate people who have great difficulty in forming clearly defined identities. They are swayed by whatever they are around, or whoever they make contact with. Others distort their personal identities dramatically out of proportion. Rather than sacrifice the ego to merge with something numinous and divine, a person may try to imbue the ego itself with those qualities. Instead of seeking to reconnect to God, the person tries to play God – a form of inflation related to what Abraham Maslow called ‘higher-sidetracking’.
Along with the 12th house confusion about who we are often comes a lack of any concrete direction in life. On some level, there may be the feeling that since everything is all the same anyway, what’s the difference? As soon as a clear identity is distinguished or a structure is imposed on the life, something happens which pulls the rug from under the feet and nebulousness reigns supreme again. As soon as the individual thinks he or she has captured something upon which to hang the sense of ‘I’, it mysteriously slips away or disappears. The capacity to hold things together or further their own personal ends is somehow subservient to a much greater dissolving power over which there is little control.
The obscuring of boundaries between the self and others may create confusion about where we begin and other people end, but it also confers a greater degree of empathy and compassion for those with whom we share the earth. So overwhelmed by thesuffering around them, some people with a strong 12th house will seek any means of escaping or withdrawing from the world altogether. Others who feel the pain ‘out there’ as their own will naturally work in some way to relieve that pain. To varying degrees, the 12th house describes the helper, ‘fixer’, rescuer, martyr or saviour who ‘takes on’ the needs and causes of others.
The original meaning of the word sacrifice is ‘to make sacred’. Something was made sacred by offering it to the gods or the higher forces. Rippling through all the levels of meaning of the 12th is the supposition that the individual is redeemed through self-sacrifice, through offering the self up to something greater. This is true in so far as we must, to some extent, let go of a sense of an autonomous and separate self to merge with the all-embracing whole. While sacrifice and suffering often serve to soften the ego and give rise to greater empathy and spiritual awareness, the value of pain and the nature of sacrifice are too easily distorted into ‘I have to suffer to find God’ or ‘Anything that might constitute personal satisfaction must be given up’. However, perhaps it is not things themselves which must be sacrificed, but rather ourattachmentto them. To the degree that we derive our identity or fulfilment from such things as relationships, possessions, ideologies or belief systems, we lose touch with our deeper and most basic unbounded nature.
Some people may even manage to acquire or achieve their 11th house dreams and wishes only to discover, in the 12th, that they still feel cheated of a more complete happiness. What they thought would give them ultimate satisfaction just wasn’t enough, or didn’t turn out to be everything. The Romans had a saying ‘Quod hoc adaeternitatem?’ meaning ‘What is this compared with eternity?’ Similarly, the 12th house is a constant reminder that all joys long for infinity.
Traditionally, the 12th house (along with the other water houses – the 4th and the 8th) reveals patterns, drives, urges and compulsions which operate from below the level of conscious awareness and yet significantly influence our choices, attitudes and directions in life. Stored in our unconscious memory, past experiences colour the way we see and meet the world. But from how far back do these past influences stem?
In some cases, planets and signs in the 12th may relate to what psychologists call ‘the umbilical effect’. According to this concept, the developing embryo is receptive not just to physical substances which the mother ingests, but is also affected by her overall psychological state during the gestation period. Her attitudes and experiences are transmitted through the umbilical connection to the foetus in the womb. The nature of what is ‘passed on’ to the child in this way is shown by placements in the 12th. If Pluto is there, the mother might have endured a traumatic time during the pregnancy. The child is then born with a sense of the danger of life and a nagging apprehension that doom is only around the corner. There is no conscious memory of the source of this attitude: only a vague feeling that this is what life is about. For example, I recently came across the case of a pregnant mother who was diagnosed as having a brain tumour. Her baby daughter was born with Pluto in the 12th and the mother died shortly after her birth.
What about further back than the womb? Many astrologers refer to the 12th as the ‘house ofkarma’.Reincarnationists believe that the immortal human soul is on a journey of perfection and return to its source that cannot be accomplished in one short lifespan. Definite laws, rather than chance, operate to determine the circumstances of every lifetime or each stage of the sojourn. With each new incarnation, we bring with us theharvest of experience from previous lives, as well as latent capacities awaiting development. Causes set in motion in prior existences affect what we meet in the present one. The soul chooses a certain time to be born because the astrological pattern fits the experiences needed for the present stage of growth. In this sense, the entire chart depicts ourkarma– both what has accrued as a result of past actions and also what we need to awaken to proceed further. More specifically, the 12th house shows what we are ‘bringing over’ from the past which will operate this lifetime on either the debit or credit side of our account.
Difficult placements in the 12th may indicate old ‘trouble spots’ and energies which we misused in earlier lives and still need to learn to handle wisely in this one. Positive placements in this house suggest ingrained qualities which will serve us advantageously this lifetime as a result of ‘work’ done on them in the past. Relative to this theory, some astrologers label the 12th the house of ‘self-sustainment or self-undoing’. For instance, if Mars or Aries is there, it could be that selfishness, impulsiveness, or rashness has been a problem in the past and a continuation of such behaviour may be the cause of a ‘downfall’ in this life. On the other hand, a well-aspected 12th house Mars suggests that positive Mars qualities such as courage, strength and forthrightness have already been learned and will sustain the native through difficult times, coming to the fore just when they are most needed. With mixed aspects to placements in the 12th, the effect of that planet or energy somehow hangs in the balance, as if we are being tested for how we handle that principle. If we use it wisely we will be rewarded; if we run amok with the planet or sign in question, the consequences are likely to be severe.
Whether we refer to ‘the umbilical effect’ or to the theory of karma and reincarnation, placements in the 12th describe influences which have come down to us from causes and sources which we cannot obviously remember or see. Through the watery 4th we inherit or retain vestiges of our ancestral past. In the 12th, it is possible that we are receptive to an even larger pool or memory – what Jung called the collective unconscious: the entire memory of the whole human race. Jung defined the collective unconscious as ‘the precondition of each individual psyche, just as the sea is the carrier of the individual wave’.3In some way, as shown by the 12th house, each of us is linked to the past, carrying records of experiences far beyond what we have personally known.
Besides the residue of the past, however, the collective unconscious is also the storehouse of latent potentials waiting to be tapped. Colin Wilson writes that ‘the unconscious mind may include all man’s past but it also includes his future.’4The unconscious mind is more than just a reservoir of repressed or buried thoughts, impulses and wishes – it is also the source of ‘potentialities for knowing and experiencing’ which the individual has yet to contact.5The 12th house, in other words, contains our future as well as our past.
Some people with 12th house placements serve as the mediators and transmitters of universal, mythic and archetypal images swirling about on the level of the collective unconscious. To varying degrees, certain artists, writers, composers, actors, religious leaders, healers, mystics and modern-day prophets tap into this realm and become the vehicles for inspiring others with what they have ‘tuned into’. They touch the appropriate chord which then resonates with something inside us, and we are able to share their experience. Numerous examples of charts with 12th house placements illustrate this phenomenon: the composer Claude Debussy with sensuous Venus in Leoin the 12th; William Blake with the imaginative and feeling Moon in Cancer in this house; the poet Byron whose expansive and playful use of word, rhyme and form invigorated the whole Romantic movement had Jupiter in Gemini in the 12th; and the visionary Pierre Teilhard de Chardin with the Sun, Neptune, Venus, Pluto and the Moon all in the 12th, are just a few cases in point.
It is as if energies in the 12th house are not intended to be used solely for personal ends. We may be asked to express that principle for the sake of others, not just for ourselves. For instance, if Mars is there we may take on the role of fighting a battle or cause for other people. In this sense, we give our Mars away, or ‘offer it up’ to others. Mercury in the 12th may speak other people’s thoughts or serve as a spokesperson for others.
Some people, through 12th house placements, lead what might be called ‘symbolic lives’. Their individual life issues reflect trends or dilemmas in the collective atmosphere. For example, Mohandes Gandhi, with the Sun in Libra in the 12th, became the living embodiment of a Libran principle of peaceful co-existence for millions of people. Uranus in the 12th house of Hitler’s chart rendered him exceptionally open to ideologies which may have been in the air at that time. Bob Dylan has Sagittarius on the 12th house cusp and its ruler Jupiter in the 5th, the area of the chart related to creative expression. Through his music he was both the mouthpiece and inspiration for many of the trends of the 1960s counter-culture. A black woman with Uranus in Cancer in the 12th was born and raised in a part of England where there were hardly any non-whites. In having to integrate herself into the life of the town, she was not only dealing with her own personal dilemma but fighting the cause of many other black people as well.
The 12th house has been called the house of ‘secret enemies’ and ‘behind the scenes activity’. This could be taken literally to mean people who plot or conspire against us. However, it is more likely to pertain to hidden weaknesses or forces in ourselves which undermine the realization of our conscious goals and objectives. In brief, unconscious drives and compulsions as shown by the 12th house placements can thwart the achievement of our conscious aims. For instance, if a man has the Moon and Venus in the 7th house, there is a strong urge to be close to another person in an intimate relationship. But if this man also has Uranus in the 12th, it suggests that unconsciously there may be such a strong desire for freedom and independence that he will somehow sabotage any attempt to form binding ties. Generally, in any contest between conscious aims and unconscious aims, it is usually the unconscious which wins. In this case, he may habitually be attracted only to those women who are not free to marry or who, for some reason, do not wish to reciprocate his advances. In this way, the unconscious compulsion to remain independent (Uranus in the 12th) is victorious over the more conscious needs. If we are conscious of urges in ourselves, we can do something to regulate and alter these if we so wish. If we are unconscious of certain patterns or drives, these have a way of dominating and controlling us. What we are unconscious of in ourselves has a knack of coming up from behind and hitting us over the head. Therefore, if no matter how hard we try, some conscious goal is continually blocked, we might examine the 12th house for clues why.
The linking of the 12th house with institutions makes sense in the light of the various connotations of this house discussed so far. The 12th shows what is hidden or in the background just as hospitals and prisons are, in part, places where certain people are ‘stored away’ from society. Those with difficult placements in the 12th may ‘crack’under the strain of life or fall prey to powerful unconscious complexes which erupt to the surface, resulting in the need to be looked after and contained. Others are ‘put away’ because they are considered dangerous to the well-being of society. In any of these cases, the will of a higher authority is forced on them, congruent with the 12th house principle of the individual submitting to something greater than the self. Hospitalization or a period of withdrawal from life may be needed to re-establish psychological and physical balance, thus making a personwholeagain – another 12th house principle. Experiences in orphanages, hospices and homes for the disabled also appear via the 12th.
It is not uncommon to find people with placements in this house working within such institutions. Serving others less fortunate than the self is the practical expression of compassion and empathy which the 12th house confers. The Church, various charities, or the monastic life will be other spheres which absorb the person who feels it is his or her calling to sacrifice or dedicate the life to God or the welfare of others. Reincarnationists believe that past ‘bad karma’ can be cleared through goodwill and service of this kind.
As already mentioned, the 12th house gives access to the collective archive of experience passed on generation after generation. Therefore, it is not surprising that the keepers of this storehouse – those who work for museums and libraries – often have 12th house placements.
It would not be appropriate to discuss the 12th house without mentioning again the research done by Michel and Françoise Gauquelin.6They analysed the careers of successful sportspeople and found a correlation with Mars in the 12th house sector of the chart. Similarly, scientists and physicians tended to have Saturn there, writers the Moon, and actors Jupiter. Based on their studies, it appears that planets in the 12th (and to some extent the 9th, 6th and 3rd) significantly determine the character and profession of the native. This surprised many astrologers who assumed that placements in the 1st or 10th houses should be stronger in this respect.
However, are their findings so strange in the light of what we understand the 12th house to be? If there is an urge to ‘give away’ whatever is in the 12th to other people, then it follows that we could make a career out of the principles there. Also, if the 12th house indicates energies in the collective atmosphere to which we are sensitive, then it is likely that our character and expression will reflect these. Sportspeople capture the collective urge to compete and be first (Mars), writers tune into the collective imagination (Moon), and scientists serve the collective need to classify and structure (Saturn).
Since the 12th relates to reconnecting with something numinous and divine, an individual may experience a planet there as the key or path to greatness and self-transcendence. Naturally, he or she would want to develop it. On some level, they may believe that the doors to heaven are opened through excelling at whatever principle is in the 12th. The deep longing for wholeness and immortality which exists in all of us is the enticement which motivates achievement through 12th house planets.
For some people, a 12th house emphasis contributes to the lack of a clear identity, nebulousness, directionless lives, victimization, the experience of being overwhelmed by unconscious drives or undercurrents at loose in the atmosphere, and a distorted sense of the value of suffering and self-sacrifice. On the other hand, the 12th house concept of surrendering the sense of being a separate self gives rise to true empathy andcompassion, selfless service, artistic inspiration, and ultimately the capacity to merge with the greater whole.
In the 11th house, we theorize on the unity and interconnectedness of all life. It is acknowledged in principle. In the 12th, the mystery of our oneness with the rest of creation is perceived directly with every cell of the body. All of existence is felt as part of ourselves, just as portions of our body are part of us. With such an awareness, it would be as difficult to heedlessly harm another person as it would be to cut off one of our fingers. Conversely, what we felt served our own individual well-being would invariably serve the good of the whole.
An old story illustrates the positive side to the 12th house. A man is allowed to visit Heaven and Hell. In Hell, he sees a large gathering of people sitting around a long table set with rich and delectable food. And yet these people are miserable and starving. He soon discovers that the reason for their dreadful state is that the spoons and forks provided for them arelongerthan their arms. As a result, they are unable to bring the food to their mouths and feed themselves. Then the man is shown Heaven. He finds the same table set out there, with the same extra-long eating utensils. But, in Heaven, instead of just trying to feed their own selves, each person uses his or her spoon and fork to feed one another. They are all well-fed and happy.
While notfully losingour own personal identity or sense of our own unique individuality, we need to experience, acknowledge, honour, and connect to that part of us which is universal and unbounded. Ultimately, the trick is to swim in the waters of the 12th house without drowning in it.
We emerge out of the universal matrix of life, establish ourselves as individual entities, and then find that after all we are really one with all creation. Whether our connection with the greater whole is consciously experienced or not through the 12th house, it is inevitable that our physical bodies will die and disintegrate. When the body dies, so does the sense of our having a separate physical existence. One way or another, we return to the collective ground out of which we have come. What was there in the beginning is there at the end. We arrive back at the Ascendant to begin again on a new level of the spiral.
Notes – Chapter 141. Ken Wilber,Up From Eden, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1983, pp. 25-6. See also Dianne Binnington,The House of Dilemma, Snowhite Imprints, Bristol, England, 1981.2. Wilber,Up From Eden, pp. 13-15.3. Jung cited in Ferrucci,What We May Be, Turnstone Press, Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, England, 1982, p. 44.4. Colin Wilson,The Philosopher’s Stone, Warner Paperback Library, New York, 1974, p. 7.5. Rollo May cited in Yalom, p. 278.6. Michel Gauquelin,The Truth About Astrology, Hutchinson, London, 1984, p. 30.

