The Twelve Houses

15.GROUPING THE HOUSES

Search for measurable elements among your phenomena and then search for relationsbetween these measures.Alfred North Whitehead,Science and the Modern World
The twelve houses can be subdivided and classified under different headings. A knowledge of these groupings enriches an understanding of the meaning of each house and the way in which one house or sphere of life relates to another.
Hemispheres and Quadrants
The line of the horizon divides the chart into the upper (southern) and lower (northern) hemispheres. The houses which fall below the horizon (houses 1-6) are most directly concerned with the development of an individual and separate identity and the basic requirements a person needs to meet life. These are known as thePersonal Houses.
The houses which are above the horizon (houses 7-12) focus on the interconnection of the individual with others: on an intimate one-to-one level, in terms of society as a whole, and in relation to the rest of creation. These are known as theCollective Houses(see Figure5).Fig.5
The axis of the meridian crosses the line of the horizon cutting the horizon in half, and spawning another division of the wheel of the houses, theFour Quadrants(see Figure6).
InQuadrant I(houses 1-3) the individual begins to take shape as a distinct entity. A sense of a separate identity forms through the differentiation of self (1st house), body and substance (2nd house) and mind (3rd house) out of the universal matrix of life.
InQuadrant II(houses 4-6) growth involves the further expression and refinement of the differentiated self. In the 4th house, shaped by the family background and ancestral inheritance, the individual moulds a more cogent sense of his or her own identity. With this as a gauge and base, the ‘I’ seeks to express itself outwardly in the 5th house, and then further specify, fine-tune and perfect its particular nature, skills and capabilities (6th house).
InQuadrant III(houses 7-9) the individual expands awareness through relationship with other people. In the 7th house, there is the close encounter between one person’s reality and another person’s reality. The 8th house depicts the breaking down of the individual ego-identity through the process of merging with another. The subsequent broadening, reawakening, and re-visioning of the self is shown by the 9th house.
InQuadrant IV(houses 10-12) the main concern is the expanding or transcending of the boundaries of the self to include not just one other but many others. A person’s role in society is described by the 10th house, various forms of group consciousness are explored in the 11th, and an individual’s spiritual identity – his or her relationship to that which is greater and yet inclusive of the self – is explored in the 12th.Fig.6
While the grouping of the houses by quadrants makes sense in terms of the logical boundaries created by the cross of the horizon and the meridian, it is possible to subdivide the wheel in yet another way (see Figure7). In houses 1-4, the individual is born and becomes conscious of his or her own existence, body, mind, background and feelings. This phase establishes a sense of the ‘me-in-here’. Houses 5-8 depict the urge to express and share the autonomous self with others: ‘me-in-here’ meets ‘you-out-there’. In houses 9-12 the task is integration, not just with a few others, but with society-at-large and the greater whole of which we are a part: the development of the ‘us-in-here’ reality. In this classification, each phase begins with the spark and inspiration of a fiery house (1st, 5th and 9th) indicating the birth into a new level of being; and each phase ends with a watery house (4th, 8th and 12th) describing the dissolution, assimilation and transition which leads to the next stage.Fig. 7
Angular, Succedent and Cadent
The houses are traditionally classified according to whether they are angular, succedent or cadent.
Angular Houses (Figure8)
In Quadrant systems of house-division, theAngular Housesare the ones which follow immediately upon the four angles: the 1st house begins with the Ascendant, the 4th house with the IC, the 7th with the Descendant, and the 10th with the MC. In the natural zodiac, the angular houses correspond to the cardinal signs of Aries (spring equinox), Cancer (summer solstice), Libra (autumnal equinox) and Capricorn (winter solstice). Cardinal signs generate and release new energy. Similarly, the angular houses spur us into action and represent four basic areas of life which have a strong impact on our individuality: personal identity (1st house), the home and family background (4th house), personal relationships (7th) and career (10th).
Fig. 8 Angular Houses Activating and Generating Energy
The signs of the cardinal cross figuratively square or oppose one another. Likewise, the four angular houses represent four spheres of life which are potentially in conflict with each other. An understanding of the paradoxes and dilemmas presented by the different angular houses will help in the interpretation of possible squares and oppositions planets may make to one another if placed in these houses.*
The 1st-7th opposition
Some degree of personal identity and freedom (1st) must be sacrificed to function in a relationship (7th). An opposition between these two houses gives the classic dilemma of will versus love: how much do we assert our own individuality and how much do we adjust to what others need or require. There is a fear that if we adjust too much, then we lose our own separate identity; but conversely, if we are too self-centred and demanding, then others won’t love us.
The 4th-10th opposition
Here, one possible conflict is between staying at home and participating in the family unit (4th) versus being away from the family in order to establish a career (10th). The man immersed in career responsibilities does not have the time to be with the family, or spare moments to reflect on the deeper meaning of life. The woman with oppositionsbetween these two houses may be torn between the desire for a profession and her role as a wife or mother. The child-in-us (4th) could conflict with the ‘adult-like’ behaviour expected in professional life (10th). The businessman, for instance, cannot ‘throw a tantrum’ in front of a client if the deal threatens to collapse at the last moment.
Our early conditioning (4th) influences how we function later in society (10th). Have we been so denigrated as a child that we feel we have nothing to offer society? Or are we the rejected child who is determined to show ‘them’ and make a mark on the world? Have we been so spoiled and protected by our parents that we lack the equipment or impetus to venture out of the family home at all? These issues may arise if there are oppositions between planets in the 4th and 10th houses.
The 1st-4th square
We are born separate and unique individuals (1st), but to what degree does the home life (4th) support or quash our budding individuality? I drew up the chart of a young man who had Jupiter in Leo in the 1st squared to Neptune in Scorpio in the 4th. His natural spontaneity and enthusiasm (Jupiter in the 1st) had to be contained and restricted so as not to disturb an ailing father (Neptune in the 4th). We might like to be independent and free (1st), but regressive urges to stay with what is secure and already known inhibit us (4th).
The 4th-7th square
With squares between the 4th and 7th houses, there is a likelihood of projecting ‘unfinished business’ around a parent (usually the father) onto a partner. Patterns established early in life (4th) often obscure our ability to see other people clearly (7th). Problems in establishing a home (4th) with a partner (7th) could arise if planets in these houses square one another. The capacity to be objective and fair with others is interfered with because of childish needs and complexes.
The 7th-10th square
Conflicts could surface between career (10th) and relationship (7th). If we are so busy pursuing a career, we may have less time for close partnerships. Our attractiveness to a partner (7th) may be contingent on our status in the world (10th). Or a partner may be sought who enhances our social standing. Issues with our mother can interfere with seeing a partner clearly.
The 1st-10th square
Self-discipline is needed to forge a career (10th) and this invariably limits our personal freedom and spontaneity (1st). What society approves of and validates (10th) may impose restrictions on what we are naturally inclined to do (1st). Something the mother represents (10th) may inhibit the expression of the 1st house planet. One man with Venus in Leo in the 1st squared to the Moon in Taurus in the 10th wanted to be an artist (Venus in Leo in the 1st) but his mother insisted that he choose a more practical career (Moon in Taurus in the 10th). Often, we are labelled solely by what we do in the world (10th) rather than by other qualities we might possess (1st).

Succedent Houses (Figure9)
The forces set in motion in the angular houses are concentrated, embellished, utilized and developed further in theSuccedent Houses:the 2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th. These houses are naturally associated with the fixed signs of Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius, which consolidate the generative energy of cardinal signs. The succedent 2nd house adds substance to the personal identity (1st) through defining our possessions, resources, shape and boundary. In the succedent 5th house, we affirm and strengthen the sense of ‘I’ distilled from the angular 4th by expressing who we are and impressing ourselves on others. Through the activity of relating to others (angular 7th house) we increase our resources and delve deeper into ourselves (the succedent 8th). Participating in the maintaining and functioning of society (the angular 10th) enhances the awareness of ourselves as social beings and provides the basis for expanding our sense of identity to encompass bigger and broader boundaries (the succedent 11th).
Like the angular houses, the four succedent houses represent spheres of life which are potentially in conflict with each other.Fig. 9 Succedent Houses Stabilizing and Concretizing Energy
The 2nd-8th opposition
Conflicts arise between what one person possesses and values versus what another person holds dear. The 2nd house preserves and maintains forms; the 8th house tears things down to make room for something new. We sacrifice our boundaries (2nd) to merge fully with another (8th). The 2nd house sees the face value of something, while the 8th house looks underneath to detect the hidden significance. The 2nd house tends to indulge the appetites and bodily needs, whereas the 8th seeks to gain mastery over instinctual processes.

The 5th-11th opposition
In the 5th house, we create for our own personal satisfaction, such as designing our own stationery; in the 11th, we devote our energy to something greater than ourselves, such as designing a poster to promote a lecture for a group to which we belong. Another issue might be whether we are willing to release our children or works of art (5th) into the world (11th). A dilemma may arise between ‘what I want to do’ and the consensus of the group of which I am a member. Do I demand they conform to me (5th) or do I accept the group opinion (11th)?
The 2nd-5th square
A number of conflicts can be stirred if planets in the 2nd square planets in the 5th. The need for security and a regular income (2nd) could interfere with time spent on more creative and recreational activities (5th). Conversely, the struggling artist or ‘resting’ actor (5th) often suffers from the lack of a stable income (2nd). Some people with squares between the 2nd and 5th derive their sense of power, worth and importance (5th) solely through what they own and possess (2nd). Children (5th) might be treated as possessions (2nd) or experienced as a drain on resources.
The 5th-8th square
In the 5th house, we like to be seen as bright, positive, creative and special. Value is placed on those things which enhance the joy and dignity of life. The 8th depicts the darker, more intense and destructive elements lurking in the personality. If we have these two houses accentuated we may be engaged in a fierce battle between light and dark forces in the psyche. The kinds of crises associated with the 8th house can temporarily disrupt the 5th house’s spontaneity and enthusiasm for life. Instead of feeling in charge of our lives (5th), we may be driven by unconscious complexes (8th) to act in ways over which we have little control. Sexual conquest could be utilized as a means of affirming our self-importance. Squares between the 5th and 8th houses can sometimes manifest as intense conflicts with one’s children. Personal creativity (5th) is associated with emotional tension and frustration (8th). On the positive side, periods of psychological renewal and cleansing (8th) free the life-force to express itself more purely (5th). Creative expression (5th) may be a way of clearing something out of the system (8th). Destructive excesses (8th) may be glamorized (5th) as in the case of the tortured French poet, Rimbaud, who had Saturn in the 8th squared to Neptune in the 5th.
The 8th-11th square
The 11th house may have a vision of a better society, but has it taken into account deep-seated complexes (8th) in people which obscure the ability to relate to others fairly and objectively? The raging and needy infant in us (8th) can wreak havoc in our relationships with friends or groups (11th). The societal reformer with squares between the 11th and the 8th may be fired with such conviction that any means justifies achieving his or her ends. Sexual undercurrents (8th) could intrude on a friendship (11th). In short, highly charged emotions could inhibit the ease with which we relate to the larger unit of society. Conflicts could arise between our own humanitarian, political and social ideals (11th) and those of our partner (8th).

The 11th-2nd square
The 11th house may propose such liberal aims as the equal distribution of wealth, but the 2nd house desire to own things personally could contradict this. The 2nd house need to establish clear individual boundaries conflicts with the 11th house urge for a wider group membership. Eleventh house idealism may be ‘out of touch’ with the down-to-earth 2nd house. Problems could ensue in financial dealings (2nd) with friends (11th). We could become so strongly attached (2nd) to achieving certain goals and objectives (11th), that excessive force could be used to obtain these. We may cling too tenaciously (2nd) to ideas (11th). More positively, there may be the practical sense and ability (2nd) to realize hopes and wishes (11th).Fig. 10 Cadent Houses Distributing, Readjusting and Reorientating Energy
Cadent Houses (Figure10)
TheCadent Houses(the 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th) are associated with the mutable signs of Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces. While angular housesgenerateenergy and succedent housesconcentrateenergy, the cadent housesdistributeandreorganizeenergy. In each cadent house, we reconsider, readjust or reorientate ourselves on the basis of what we have previously experienced in the preceding succedent house. In the cadent 3rd house, we learn more about who we are through comparing and contrasting ourselves with those around us. As the mental capacities develop, we enter a world beyond that of the bodily senses and biological needs (2nd house). The cadent 6th house reflects on the use or misuse of the outpouring of energy in the 5th, and makes adjustments accordingly. The interpersonal explorations and struggles of the 8th are conducive to the 9th house reflections on the deeper laws and processes which govern existence, and the patterns which weave us together. The perspective of the individualego, already reeling from the 11th house experience of being part of a group or larger system, finally, in the cadent 12th, topples down altogether from its position as king of the mountain.
Cadent houses have often been described as weak or insubstantial, but the research done by the Gauquelins suggests that placements in these houses are more powerful than previously believed. Michel Gauquelin and his wife Françoise were both psychologists and statisticians who studied the diurnal distribution of the planets in thousands of accurately timed birthcharts. In particular, they analysed the house position of planets in the charts of certain professions – actors, artists, doctors, business executives, politicians, scientists, soldiers, sports champions, writers and others. The results of their research showed that the planets naturally associated with each of these professions (such as Mars for sportspeople, Saturn for scientists, etc.) appeared more often in the cadent houses than in the angular houses, as traditional astrology would have expected. For instance, Mars in the charts of successful sportspeople appeared most often in the 12th and 9th houses: that is, justafterthe rising and superior culmination of the planet rather than just before in the 1st or 10th houses. The next most frequent house positions of Mars for the sportspeople they tested were the 6th and the 3rd houses. Again, these are just after the setting and inferior culmination of the planet, rather than before in the 7th or 4th houses. The conclusion to be drawn from their survey is that cadent houses are more important factors in determining character and career than previously suspected.
Briefly recapitulated, they found these correlations:1
1. Mars appeared most frequently in cadent houses in the charts of physicians, military leaders, sports champions and top executives.
2. Jupiter appeared most frequently in cadent houses in the charts of actors, playwrights, politicians, military leaders, top executives and journalists.
3. Saturn appeared most frequently in cadent houses in the charts of scientists and physicians.
4. The Moon appeared most frequently in cadent houses in the charts of writers and politicians.
In the discussion of the 12th house, I have explained why I don’t find these results that surprising (see page 84). A similar rationale can be applied to the other cadent houses. The 9th is where we look for truth and principles to guide our lives – therefore we will be highly motivated to develop and give expression to the planets there as a way of lending greater meaning to our existence. Both the 6th and the 3rd houses describe our efforts to discern how we differ from other people. Therefore, developing the planets in these houses is crucial if we are to differentiate ourselves fully from others and define ourselves as separate individuals. The urge to connect to something greater than the self (as shown by the 12th and the 9th) and the urge to establish and characterize our own specific identities (as shown by the 3rd and the 6th) are the two complementary principles which form the crux of the human dilemma. Seen in this light, the planets in these houses assume a great importance.
As in the case of the four angular houses and the four succedent houses, the four cadent houses figuratively square or oppose one another. Each one represents a contrasting view of life and a different method of acquiring and processing information.

The 3rd-9th opposition
The 3rd house describes the nature of the analytical and concrete mind while the 9th house denotes more abstract and intuitive thought processes. The 3rd house sees the parts; the 9th looks first at the whole. When planets are found in opposition between these two houses, it could signify a good balance and integration between the right and left hemispheres of the brain. However, in certain cases, the opposition might denote a person who gathers facts (3rd) and then draws the wrong conclusions (9th) from them. Mountains are made of molehills, or conversely, a person may adhere to some belief or truth (9th) and then interpret everything around them (3rd) solely in the light of these principles. In other words, facts are distorted to prove a point. The 3rd house may labour for many weeks preparing a lecture, making sure that each word conveys the precise meaning intended. The 9th house lecturer may prefer to wait to see what the audience is like, trusting that he or she will intuitively know what to say when the time comes. Sometimes with the 3rd-9th opposition, there is a persistent feeling that the grass is greener farther afield.
The 6th-12th opposition
The 6th house examines the myriad forms of relative existence, scrutinizing in detail how one thing differs from another. The 12th house, however, embraces the essence of a thing – not how much it weighs or measures, but what it ‘feels’ like. The 6th is discriminating and selective, carefully defining boundaries; the 12th is empathetic and all-inclusive, and a boundary-dissolver. The 6th house is pragmatic, logical and concerned with the everyday realities of life; the 12th aspires to transcend whatever is mundane, and is aware of the elusive, unknowable and mysterious nuances of existence. The 6th house plans life; the 12th flows with it.
Oppositions between these two houses heighten these contrasting approaches to life, but afford a greater chance of achieving a synthesis of the various modes of being. I have seen 6th-12th house oppositions, for instance, in the charts of spiritually-minded people who also have their feet firmly on the ground. One was a dentist with Moon in Capricorn in the 6th opposing Jupiter in Cancer in the 12th, who was a devout follower of an Indian guru. Another was a carpenter who volunteered his services to train people in Third World countries in his skill. He had three planets in the 6th opposing Uranus in the 12th.
Oppositions between the 6th and 12th sometimes manifest in physical ailments which are psychological in origin. Reincarnationists believe that certain health problems (6th) may be the consequences of past-life behaviour (12th). For example, if a man overindulged in food and drink in a previous life, he might be born this life with allergies to certain foods, forcing him to pay more attention to what he put into his body. Or a person who habitually looked down on others in a past life could find himself abnormally tall in this lifetime. Or perhaps he would be born unusually short, so he could experience what it felt like to be the one looked down upon. In any case, with 6th-12th oppositions, the origins of ill health may be difficult to diagnose, stemming from a source which is not obvious to trace.
The 3rd-6th square
Here we have linked together the two houses most directly related to the processes of the logical and rational left brain. The tendency is for the mind to overwork. The 3rdhouse likes to know a little something about everything, while the 6th house wants to know as much as possible about a few things. Put these two together and we have somebody who wants to know as much as possible about everything. With planets in both the 3rd and 6th, it is possible that something could be analysed out of existence. Taken to extremes, it could be a person who insists that the only real difference between the playsOthelloandHamletis that the letters of the alphabet are arranged differently in each play.
More positively, there is generally the pursuit of information (3rd) for the sake of using it practically (6th). There can be a great deal of bickering over details and much discussion about the precise and proper way something should be done. Consequently, those with the 3rd/6th house combination usually do not let others escape with being too abstract, whimsical or vague. If I have someone with these placements scheduled for a chart reading, I will allow an extra half-hour for questions at the end. (‘Whatexactlydo you mean by …?’)
With squares between these houses, it is possible that health issues (6th) could affect physical mobility as well as the clear functioning of the mind (3rd). Sometimes unresolved conflicts with siblings (3rd) resurface in the form of problems with co-workers (6th).
The 6th-9th square
The combination of the expansive and truth-seeking 9th house with the mundane and practically-minded 6th can produce a restless soul who moves from one preoccupation to another in a constant search for one thing which is totally fulfilling. The catch is that they will usually find that the thing upon which all the hopes have been pinned somehow falls short of the mark. When that fails, something else is fervently pursued with the same abiding conviction that it should provide ‘everything’. Rather than looking to one thing to be the whole truth, they should approach it with the attitude that it may offer some version or angle of the truth. In other words, they take the pressure off one thing to be everything. Then they can find something else to offer another bit of the truth and other kinds of fulfilment. In this way, they are not opening themselves to complete disappointment if one focus of attention doesn’t deliver all the nourishment they crave.
The square between the 6th and 9th can be seen historically in the conflict between inductive modes of scientific investigation (6th) and the kind of knowing which arises from religious faith and beliefs (9th). 6th-9th tension also manifests in the kinds of theological disputes that are concerned with exactly how many angels can dance on the head of a pin. Scriptures (9th) may be interpreted in a fundamentalist way: laws and rituals are to be followed exactly to ensure that even the most humble or ordinary aspects of existence (6th) partake of the sacred or are performed in accordance to higher law (9th). There is also the ability to perceive cosmic significance (9th) in the smallest details of life (6th). On another level, health problems (6th) could occur through travel (9th). Or there may be many differences of opinion with in-laws (9th) over the management of daily affairs (6th).
The 9th-12th square
In this case we have two houses of an expansive nature in relationship to one another. Neither sphere is fond of boundaries and limitations, and those with planets in boththese houses may not feel very comfortable within the confines of a mundane existence. Usually an interest in philosophical or religious matters predominates: in extreme cases, they live in a world of symbols, dreams and images, surviving from one peak experience to the next, often totally forgetting about having to go to the dentist. They may have an unending source of transpersonal inspiration but no vehicles for expressing or relating their vision to everyday life. Not inclined to analytical thinking, they may swallow a belief whole and live it fervently until it is spat out again and something new is looked for to swallow. Some sidetrack too far with delusions of being another Napoleon or Christ, landing themselves in mental institutions (12th). More positively, those with a heavy 9th-12th emphasis serve to open other people’s eyes to realities beyond the ken of the typical 3rd-6th house thinker.
There are differences in the 9th and 12th house approach to ‘higher understanding’. The 9th house believes that the basic patterns and principles which govern life can be known and comprehended. The 12th house feels something which is often unfathomable and beyond knowing. The 9th house is basically concerned with scaling new heights; the 12th finds inspiration not only in the heights, but also in the depths – ecstasy and pain, bliss and suffering, are intimately connected. On a more mundane level, there may be strange and inexplicable yearnings to travel to different countries and a danger of imprisonment (12th) in a foreign land (9th).
The 3rd-12th square
Broadly speaking, the 12th is the unconscious mind and the 3rd the conscious mind. The 12th is the domain of what is hidden and unseen, while the 3rd perceives what is immediate and at hand in the environment. An action or statement can be appreciated at its face value (3rd) or may be felt to be cloaking less obvious feelings or motivations (12th). In psychology, this is known as themeta-meaning. The 3rd house observes the actions and makes sense of the words, but the 12th house ‘picks up on’ and is sensitive to other levels of what is being said or done. The 3rd/12th combination perceives many levels of reality at once. This confers either uncanny insight into people and situations or a great deal of mental confusion. Should they believe what they hear and see or what they sense and feel?
These kinds of mixed messages are not uncommon among siblings (3rd). In general, older siblings feel ambivalent towards the younger child: they know they are supposed to love the new baby, but jealousy and destructive urges are there as well. The younger sibling perceives the older child acting kindly towards him or her, and yet senses something less pleasant passing between them as well. Which level should be taken as real? A case in question is a woman I knew with Saturn and Pluto in the 12th squared to the Moon in Scorpio in the 3rd. Her older sister was outwardly kind to her, but underneath resented the intrusion of the younger child. Later in life, the younger child grew into a woman who had enormous difficulty trusting or believing in what others said to her. Whatever was expressed or done was interpreted in a negative light as if it was intended to threaten her. She mysteriously became deaf in one ear and lived a lonely life in isolation from others. Unresolved past issues (12th) with siblings (3rd) prevented her from relating in a natural way with those around her. With squares between the 12th and 3rd, the capacity for making decisions or the ability to clearly perceive life may be distorted by deep-rooted unconscious complexes. These need to be examined and cleaned up through a conscious analysis (3rd) of the images and fantasies lurking beneath the surface level of the psyche (12th).

Classifying the Houses by Elements
Another way to group the houses is by elements. There are three fire houses (1st, 5th and 9th); three earth houses (2nd, 6th and 10th); three air houses (3rd, 7th and 11th); and three water houses (4th, 8th and 12th). A meaningful and sequential development can be observed as we progress from the first house associated with a particular element, to the second house of that element, and on to the third house of the same element. In general, the first house associated with a particular element brings the nature of that element into focus and personalizes it. The next house aligned with that element further differentiates and defines that principle, usually through comparing our expression of it with that of others. The third house related to a particular element universalizes its expression: that element can be seen to be operating on a broad collective level.Fig. 11 Fire: The Trinity of Spirit
The Fire Houses: The Trinity of Spirit (Figure11)
Fire is the life-force which animates all living forms. It is the element associated with the will-to-be: the urge to express from inside the self.
The 1st house is the first fire house. It is also angular. If we combine the qualities of fire with the nature of angular houses (activity and release of energy) we arrive at a good description of the 1st house – the activity of releasing the life-force. The 1st house shows the initial stirring of being inside us, the urge to be a separate and distinct person. Developing the signs and planets in the 1st house vitalizes and enlivens us.
The second fire house is the 5th house. It is also a succedent house. Therefore the 5th house combines the qualities associated with succedent houses and the qualities associated with the element of fire. Succedent houses concentrate, stabilize and utilize the energy generated in angular houses. In the case of the 5th house, the pure spirit ofthe 1st house is given focus and direction. We strengthen our sense of identity (1st) by pursuing those outlets and interests which make us feel more alive, and by stamping our individuality on what we do or create (5th).
The third fire house is the 9th house. It is also a cadent house. Therefore the 9th house combines the qualities associated with cadent houses and the qualities associated with the element of fire. Cadent houses reconsider, readjust and reorientate the way we focus our energy. In the 9th house, we revamp our sense of identity through viewing life and ourselves in a broader context. The fire we recognized burning inside us in the 1st and 5th houses has now spread to everyone else: we now perceive ‘fire’ or spirit as a universal attribute existing in everything around us. In the 5th house, we explore our own personal creativity, but in the 9th we glimpse the workings of a cosmic creative intelligence which shapes life in accordance with certain laws and universal principles.
In the first fire house (1st) our own identity is sparked. In the second fire house (5th) we strengthen, confirm and express that identity. In the third fire house (9th) the creative nature of fire and the urge-to-be is seen expressing itself impersonally through the archetypal principles which govern and generate all of life.
The three fire houses symbolically trine one another. Planets in the 1st, 5th or 9th houses may literally trine each other – that is, form 120 degree angles to each other (allowing an 8-10 degree orb or so). However, in finding aspects we must always count the actual number of degrees between the two planets, not just the number of houses. A planet in the 1st does not automatically trine a planet in the 5th, and in some cases, due to the unequal size of houses in Quadrant systems, the two planets may even square one another. Nonetheless, it is helpful to understand the basic affinity between placements in houses associated with the same element in the natural zodiac.
The 1st-5th trine
If a planet in the 1st house trines a planet in the 5th, then the 1st house planet finds a creative release through the 5th house planet. For instance, if Mercury is in the 1st house and trine to Jupiter in the 5th, the urge to communicate and exchange information symbolized by Mercury may have an outlet through some form of artistic expression (Jupiter in the 5th). In trine contacts between the 1st and the 5th, there is a natural ease or flow in outwardly expressing who we are. The French author, Victor Hugo, who expressed his humanitarian concerns through literature, had sympathetic Neptune in the 1st trine to Mercury in the 5th.
The 5th-9th trine
If a 5th house planet trines a 9th house planet then what we express or create (5th) often influences and inspires other people (the expansive nature of the 9th). It may seem as if creativity flows through us from a higher source of inspiration or ‘fired’ vision. Lord Byron, the English Romantic poet who expressed his acute sensitivity to beauty through his work, had Venus in the 9th trine Neptune in the 5th.
The 1st-9th trine
Those with trines between these two houses naturally act in accord with a broadened view of life. Their actions comply with trends already in the atmosphere, and therefore less resistance is met in achieving their aims. A wide scope on existence (9th) guides the manner in which they meet the world (1st). The danger with this trine is that it can tooeasily give rise to the individual identifying the self with the Voice of God, and justifying action on the basis of a higher authority or guiding principle. For example, Francisco Franco, the fascist dictator, had the Moon, Neptune and Pluto in the 9th trine to Saturn in the 1st.Fig. 12 Earth: The Trinity of Matter
The Earth Houses: The Trinity of Matter (Figure12)
The element of earth is associated with the plane of material existence: the condensation of spirit into concrete forms.
The first earth house is the 2nd house. It is also a succedent house. Therefore, the 2nd house represents matter trying to make itself more secure or stable: hence the associations of the 2nd house with money, possessions and resources. It shows those things – including the body – which we like to call our own. In economic terms it is capital.
The second earth house is the 6th, which is also a cadent house. Therefore, the 6th house adjusts and reconsiders the earth principle. In this house, our resources and skills are compared to other people’s resources and skills. Our special abilities are refined and perfected. The body as well needs attention to function efficiently and ill health can be understood as the body trying to readjust itself. In economic terms, it represents the labour force.
The third earth house is the 10th, which is an angular house. In this case, there is the need to generate matter, i.e. productivity. In one sense, the 10th represents the forces of management who actively organize and oversee capital and labour. More personally, it shows how we purposefully structure and direct our energy and abilities for the sake of concrete and definite results. Hence, the association of the 10th with career, ambitionand the way we like to be seen by the world. More broadly, the 10th house depicts the role the individual plays in perpetuating and maintaining the body of society itself.
In the first earth house (2nd) the body and matter itself is differentiated from the ouroboric wholeness of life. In the second earth house (6th) our particular body and resources, differentiated in the 2nd, are more specifically delineated. In the third earth house (10th) our own body and practical skills (differentiated in the 2nd and more clearly defined in the 6th) come together with others to form and maintain collective material existence.
The three earth houses symbolically trine one another, and planets in these houses may literally trine each other.
The 2nd-6th trine
If a planet in the 2nd trines a planet in the 6th, the individual is equipped with resources and abilities which he or she can use skilfully and productively, and usually with adequate financial remuneration. There is often an efficient and adept handling of the material world.
The 6th-10th trine
With this trine, there is the likelihood that a person’s skills and style of working are conducive to success in a career. It is possible that something inherited via the mother (10th) contributes to the repertoire of talents and abilities (6th). The daughter of show business parents, Candice Bergen makes good use of both her beauty and intelligence in her careers as an actress and photo-journalist. She was born with Venus conjunct Uranus in Gemini in the 6th trine to Jupiter in Libra in the 10th.
The 2nd-10th trine
In this case, the career is usually well-suited to the temperament and abilities. Money and status can be earned from what a person naturally enjoys doing. Something of worth is inherited via the mother or shaping parent (10th). Sir Harry Lauder, the comedian and entertainer, had a wide public appeal and was especially loved for his Scottish dialect. He was born with Mercury (the planet of speech) in the 2nd (resources) trine to Neptune in the 10th.
The Air Houses: The Trinity of Relationship (Figure13)
Air is associated with the capacity to detach the self and view something objectively with distance and perspective. Once we have separated or distinguished ourselves from the universal matrix of life, then we can start forming relationships with what we find. The element of air correlates to the intellect and the communication and exchange of ideas.
The first air house is the 3rd, which is also a cadent house. Movement, mental development and the advent of language enable us to readjust and redefine the more concrete sense of self just forming in the 1st and 2nd houses. The second air house is the 7th, which is angular. My mind and perspective on life (3rd) meets your mind and perspective on life (7th). The coming together of two people generates an enormous amount of energy and the failure or success of a relationship may affect how we feel about many other areas of our lives. The third air house (11th) is succedent. We stabilize and strengthen our viewpoints by looking for other people (groups and friends) who share our ideas. Minds come together in the 11th. Ideas are ‘fixed’ into ideologies and‘isms’ which are broadly applied to society and ‘taken up’ by large numbers of people.Fig. 13 Air: The Trinity of Relationship
The three air houses symbolically trine one another, and planets in these houses may literally trine each other.
The 3rd-7th trine
The 3rd house is associated with communication and if a planet there trines one in the 7th, there is an ease in communicating with close partners. We can make ourselves heard as well as being able to understand or appreciate others (intellectually at least). There is usually a lively interest and fair degree of perception into the way in which one person or thing interacts or relates with another.
The 7th-11th trine
A partnership may serve as a source of social or intellectual expansion. It may be a friend (11th) who introduces this person to the future marriage partner (7th). Or an important relationship (7th) may be formed with someone the person meets through a group or organization (11th). Usually the partner (7th) shares the person’s goals and objectives and is helpful in achieving these. Jean Houston, a leading figure in humanistic psychology, has Jupiter in the 7th trine to Pluto in the 11th. She and her husband, Robert Masters, co-founded an institute for mind research and have together developed numerous techniques to broaden awareness.
The 3rd-11th trine
If a planet in the 3rd trines a planet in the 11th, there is usually an ease relating to groups of people. There may be an intuitive grasp of how the individual mind (3rd) is linked to others (11th). The person can speak clearly (3rd) about broad concepts or thosethings which he or she envisions (11th). Friends or groups (11th) inspire and expand the thinking (3rd), and conversely, the person’s point of view or general knowledge affects others. Albert Einstein had Uranus in the 3rd trine to Neptune in the 11th. His new discoveries (Uranus in the 3rd) have led to a greater understanding of the interconnectedness of all life (11th). On another level, a 3rd-11th trine may mean that neighbourhood groups (3rd) can be formed to promote needed social changes (11th), or a sibling (3rd) might introduce the person to new friends, ideas or groups (11th).
The Water Houses: The Trinity of Soul (Figure14)
Water is the element associated with the feelings. All three water houses are concerned with emotions which dwell beneath the surface level of consciousness. They also deal with the past conditioned responses which are now instinctual, unreflective and inbred.
The first water house is the 4th, which is also angular. It describes feelings active deep within us, as well as the family background and influences within the early home which shape the identity. In the second water house, the succedent 8th, our feelings are strengthened, deepened and stirred through close relationship with another person. Two people, each with their own family backgrounds and emotional make-up, attempt to merge into one. Greater security (a succedent quality) is sought through two people linking their feelings together. In the 8th, our own feelings (differentiated and recognized in the angular 4th) flow into another person’s feelings. In the third water house, the cadent 12th, we progress from union with a select few (8th) to a sense of unity with all life. We acknowledge the collective unconscious, the collective sea out of which we all emerge, and the background we share with everyone and everything.Fig. 14 Water: The Trinity of Soul
In the 4th house we feel our own joy and pain; in the 8th we feel the joy and pain of a close associate; in the 12th, we feel the world’s joy and pain. The sequentialdevelopment of the water houses, as with the houses of the other elements, is a movement from the personal to the interpersonal to the universal.
The three water houses symbolically trine one another, and planets in these houses may literally trine each other.
The 4th-8th trine
This aspect helps a person to share his or her deeper feelings with another person. There will be extreme sensitivity to undercurrents in the home atmosphere. Those with these placements have a knack for sensing another person’s motives or hidden feelings. With harmonious aspects between planets in the 4th and 8th, there is the likelihood that a positive early home experience increases the capacity for satisfying interpersonal relationships later in life. Sometimes, the 4th-8th trine is an indication of inheritance (8th) of land or property (4th).
The 8th-12th trine
Aspects between these houses enhance a person’s insight into what is subtle or mysterious in life. They see or feel things which others do not have the sensitivity to perceive. Resources can be found to turn a crisis into an opportunity for growth. Often help appears when it is most needed. People with these aspects can guide others through times of upheaval (8th) and may work successfully within institutions (12th). A woman I know with the Sun in the 8th trine Neptune in the 12th has narrowly escaped death three times. She was also employed as a counsellor (8th) for young offenders in prison (12th) and a fund-raiser (8th) for charities (12th). Recently a family inheritance (8th) has freed her to pursue her humanitarian aims more fully (12th).
The 4th-12th trine
Those with trines between the 4th and 12th houses are so sensitive to undercurrents in the atmosphere that they often experience other people’s moods and feelings as their own. There is a natural receptivity to collective trends and fashions. Conversely, they are sometimes capable of influencing a group of people through the power of their emotions and feelings. There may be a psychic link with the father (4th), whether he is alive or not. The possibilities of positive experiences through 12th house institutions are increased. Times of rest and retreat from outer life are periodically needed and usually beneficial. Paramhansa Yogananda, an Eastern mystic who founded the Self-Realization Institute, was born with Venus and Mercury in the 4th trine to the Moon in the 12th.
Notes – Chapter 151. Gauquelin, p. 30.
*A square is a 90 degree angle between two planets; the opposition is a 180 degree angle. A planet in the 1st may or may not oppose a planet in the 7th. However, if they are in opposition, tension arises between these two areas of life. Even if they do not form an opposition aspect, the pull of one house and the pull of the opposite house could still present a problem. The same applies to planets in those houses which, figuratively speaking at least, square one another.
