The Twelve Houses

17.ASCENDANT TYPES

The sign on the Ascendant informs us of the qualities we should consciously strive to manifest in the process of self-discovery and unfoldment. However, it would be misleading to consider just this sign alone, and not take into account the meaning of the opposite sign which will fall on the Descendant or 7th house cusp. While the Ascendant is the point of self-awareness, the Descendant is the point of awareness of others. We find ourselves through the Ascendant, but the Descendant is what we find in others. What rises above the horizon and into the light of consciousness (the Ascendant) is complemented by what sinks beneath the horizon into the dark (the Descendant). When I consciously identify certain qualities as ‘who I am’, then implicitly there are other qualities which I am identifying as ‘not-me’. The qualities I identify as ‘me’ are shown by the Rising sign; the qualities I identify as ‘not-me’ are shown by the Descending sign.
But the name of the game is wholeness: what we do not ‘own’ in ourselves, we will invariably attract to us. The more we develop those attributes on the Ascendant, the more we will meet the opposite attributes of the Descendant in others. The two points of the Ascendant and Descendant form a coupling or polarity which are inextricably linked. None of us exists in a vacuum, and our sense of self (Ascendant) will be reshaped by what we meet through others (Descendant). The nature of the Descending sign will attempt to modify and balance the qualities of the Ascendant until a stalemate, a compromise or a synthesis is achieved. Therefore, in discussing the significance of the Rising sign, some understanding of the implications of the Descending sign are included.
Aries on the Ascendant and Libra on the Descendant
With the fiery sign of Aries rising, the person should meet life in a straightforward and energetic manner: ‘Here I am, notice me, now let’s get things started.’ There is a need to be decisive, take action, and ‘own’ the power to create and direct the life. The core of Aries rising is finding this creative potency within, not waiting around for things to happen. Life is best viewed as an adventure, quest and challenge. If other placements in the chart indicate a meek or withdrawn nature, there will be more struggle in developing the Aries qualities. If the Aries Ascendant is denied expression, the inner frustration which accumulates could periodically explode in illness, dramatic or wild outbursts, unruly fits of anger, or other forms of self-destructive behaviour. If the rest of the chart is already fairly fiery, the Aries Ascendant allows the assertiveness to flow freely, but with the danger of being too forceful or overly egocentric – which in the end may be self-defeating.
If Aries is rising then the opposite sign, Libra, will be on the Descendant, beckoning the person to balance rampant autonomy with some degree of consideration for another person. However, if those with this Ascendant have to choose one extreme or the other, it is probably wiser that they err in favour of self-assertion and daring rather than hold back too much for the sake of keeping the peace or adapting to the requirements of others. After their own power has been found and the courage to be the self is freed,then they can learn to regulate, adjust and temper the nature accordingly. Ultimately, the Libran qualities of grace, forethought and consideration for another person’s case and point of view will need to be included.
Physically, Aries rising may evince a lively, energetic face with intense but darting eye-contact. Movements are usually quick and impulsive, as if the person is ready at any moment to plunge headlong into some new activity. ‘Don’t stand in my way’ may be the message subtly (or not so subtly) communicated to others.
The controversial writer, Henry Miller, author of a number of books which were banned in America, had Aries rising with its ruler Mars in Scorpio in the 7th. Sexual adventures and exploits (Mars in Scorpio in the 7th) were integral to his daring voyage of self-discovery (Mars rules the Aries Ascendant).
Taurus on the Ascendant and Scorpio on the Descendant
If Taurus, a fixed earth sign, is on the Ascendant, then life needs to be met more slowly and steadily. Rather than rushing into things, Taurus rising should plan, structure and work systematically towards its goals. The fixity of this sign on the Ascendant suggests that the person may need to hold onto or remain in one phase of experience much longer than Aries rising types. The danger is becoming too lazy or indolent and staying with something purely out of habit, attachment, and security when it has truly outlived its purpose or usefulness. It will be necessary for the Taurus rising to learn when to hold on and when to let go.
Those with Taurus rising also have a need to feel comfortable with the earthy and material sphere of life, and to see concrete and tangible results for their efforts. A sensible regard for the body and its requirements should be developed. Being too driven or ruled by the instincts is not the ideal, but cutting the self off from the basic instinctual nature is not a healthy situation either.
When Taurus is ascending, then Scorpio is found on the Descendant. This means that strong and intense emotions (Scorpio) will be evoked in the sphere of relationship. Jealousy and possessiveness can be the root of many interpersonal problems, and those with Taurus rising will have to confront, examine and gain greater mastery over the destructive side of their emotional nature. In other words, Scorpio on the 7th house cusp forces them to look inward, to probe hidden motivations and underlying causes in order to transform the way they use their power. The Scorpio Descendant does not allow them to take life at face value. Through relationship problems they are jarred from their lethargy and periodically required to cleanse and eliminate what they have stored up inside, changing old and outworn habit patterns.
I have noticed two different physical types associated with Taurus on the Ascendant. The more usual embodiment of this sign is solid, earthy-looking, and heavy-set: a healthy, ‘country’ look just right for ‘a roll in the hay’ or a Falstaffian appearance, often with the characteristically thick Taurean neck. On the other hand, some Taurus rising individuals exhibit a more delicate and chiselled look, emphasizing the aesthetic side of the Venus rulership of the sign. The actress Vivien Leigh (famous for her role as Scarlett O’Hara inGone With The Wind)is an example of this type: she was born with Taurus rising and Venus, its ruler, in Libra.
Percy Bysshe Shelley, the English lyric poet described as fragile and delicate, also had Taurus rising and its ruler Venus in the 5th house of creative expression. Walt Whitman, with his rich appreciation of life and nature, had Venus rising in Taurus.

Gemini on the Ascendant and Sagittarius on the Descendant
If Gemini is rising, life should be met with inquisitiveness, curiosity, and the desire to figure out how people and things work. Versatility and adaptability are two of Gemini’s assets, but can give rise to too many diverse interests and the ‘jack of all trades and master of none’ syndrome. This Ascendant hates to lose alternatives and being committed to just one thing means excluding so many others.
Developing the ability to communicate through writing, speaking or any other form of exchanging ideas contributes to their sense of identity as well as increasing their impact on the environment. In some way, they are meant to distribute information – picking up certain ideas or attitudes in one place and then depositing and applying these in other areas. If the rest of the chart is of an earthy or watery nature, the ability to be analytical, detached and objective is even more of a pressing need. However, if the rest of the chart is already airy and fiery, then this Rising sign adds to the restlessness of the nature and the difficulty in staying in one place long enough to truly deepen the understanding of that sphere or to become a real authority in that area. There is the danger of too quickly ‘going into the head’ and losing touch with the body and feelings.
If Gemini is rising, then Sagittarius is found on the 7th house cusp. Through a relationship, they are offered another person’s philosophical frame of reference through which to understand, explore and interpret life. The best partner is someone who can counter-effect Gemini’s tendency to become lost in a maze of ideas or a web of inconsequentials. The broader vision and aspirations of Sagittarius help Gemini rising maintain a sense of direction and goal, rather than being constantly side-tracked. In short, other people often provide the sense of overall purpose which the Gemini Ascendant cannot find on its own.
Gemini rising is often embodied in a lithe, agile physique with slender hands, which when not busy gesticulating are clever at taking something apart and putting it back together again. The person may literally be ‘of two minds’ about many situations and even look like different people at different times. Often they are adept at impersonating others.
George Bernard Shaw, who used his acute mind and literary ability to promote his philosophical and social beliefs, is a good example of the Gemini Ascendant/Sagittarius Descendant combination. Vance Packard, the author ofThe Hidden PersuadersandTheStatus Seekers, also used his fact-finding Gemini Ascendant to detect and expose the broader trends (Sagittarius) at work in contemporary society.
Cancer on the Ascendant and Capricorn on the Descendant
With Cancer on the Ascendant, greater self-realization is achieved through a sophisticated attunement to the feeling nature. Some people with Cancer rising (especially if the rest of the chart is predominantly watery, or if Neptune is strongly figured) are so emotionally vulnerable and exposed that they learn to protect themselves by developing a hard outer shell. Their task is to find ways of using their sensitivity rather than being overwhelmed by it. Others with Cancer rising (if the rest of the chart shows a great deal of air or earth) may be unaware of just how much is teeming under a cool and collected surface. This type will attract experiences which underline the need to acknowledge, respect and free the feelings.
The nature of the crab provides an apt description of the Cancer Ascendant. Besides being ready at a moment’s notice to withdraw back into its shell, the crab has a way ofapproaching situations sideways, reflecting the non-confronting nature of this Rising sign. The crab is not comfortable all the time in the water, so it ventures out onto land, but then retreats back into the water again. Cancer rising also exhibits a two-steps-forward, one-step-backward dance-like ebb and flow. Cancer on the 1st house should learn to respect and ‘go with’ an internal and organic sense of their own timing and rhythm. In this respect, they are capable of ‘tuning into’ the cyclic nature of life. And yet there is a tenacity to the crab; its grasping claws do not easily relinquish what it holds onto. Those with Cancer rising cling to their feelings – be they joy or pain – and won’t easily relinquish them until a stronger feeling overtakes. Explanations, reasons and rationalizations, while making perfect sense to an air sign rising, won’t get you very far with the crab, and may even be turned against you.
The sign of Cancer is associated with the womb and breasts. The breasts provide the nourishment to sustain new life, and the womb provides the perfect environment in which something can grow. If Cancer is on the Ascendant, the person grows in self-awareness through developing qualities of nurturing and caring. Whether it’s through fostering a family, a business project, or a strongly felt cause, Cancer rising blossoms and ‘comes into its own’. However, if they shun any active version of the mother role, then they have a way of flipping to the other side: that is, looking for others to play mother to them. An over-identification with the mother, a tendency to stay too long within the womb of the family of origin, or a persistent search for the Ideal Mother they lost or never had, are some of the issues which may manifest with Cancer rising.
The opposite sign of Capricorn will be found on the 7th house cusp, and evokes those qualities which balance the extremes of Cancer. Those with Cancer rising may be flooded and swept away by upsurges of emotion and feeling, but maintaining a relationship demands that they discriminate between which emotions are appropriate and useful and which should be filtered or kept under control. Through partnership, a structure (Capricorn) is built, into which the otherwise random and chaotic feelings of Cancer can flow. They may enact their own need to achieve in the world through helping another person to become successful and established (Capricorn on the 7th). With this placement, a partner is sought who will offer security, strength and stability. At some point, however, Cancer rising will need to find these qualities from within, rather than importing others to provide them.
This Ascendant often has the characteristic ‘moon face’ – round, receptive and pleasing. Often there is a soft, fleshy appearance with a propensity to put on weight or retain fluids. The upper part of the body may be out of proportion to the rest of the torso.
The Austrian composer Franz Schubert was born with Cancer rising, and its ruler, the Moon, in Pisces in the 10th: an apt configuration for a man who expressed so much feeling through his career in music. Vincent Van Gogh had Cancer on the Ascendant with the Moon square to Neptune, Mars and Venus. His erratic life is a good example of the extremes of sensitivity and emotional chaos associated with this Rising sign.
Leo on the Ascendant and Aquarius on the Descendant
Leo rising creates a world in which the need to develop power, authority and creative expression are requisite to gaining a sense of individual selfhood. The house position of the Sun will designate the specific area of life through which this Ascendant can most naturally discover his or her own unique and special identity. It will be in that sphere that this person will seek love, admiration, applause and effectiveness.
However, for some with Leo rising, being effective is confused with beingaffective. Self-display, showiness and extravagant gestures are, in Leo’s case, fuelled and prompted by the pressing need to be somebody and to feel important.Anythingis better than just being ordinary. Those with Leo rising are preoccupied with something with which all of us are at some time concerned – emerging as an individual in our own right.
There is the danger that they might meet the world with too much pride. Some are born expecting to be treated like royalty; but they must be prepared to make an effort to earn the desired respect and status rather than angrily or hastily turning away if glory is not bestowed on them unquestioningly. Sometimes they are afraid or they hesitate to try to prove themselves just in case they should fail. Those who don’t manage to develop a healthy outlet for their personal power or creativity sometimes do turn bitter and cynical at the world for not recognizing their genius.
Leo is associated with the heart centre in the body, and the sign has an enormous amount of love to give. Grand gestures aside, Leo rising, like the Sun, can bestow a generous warmth, healing and life-giving energy to those on the receiving end. However, this Ascendant will usually expect something in return, some sort of grateful acknowledgement for all that they have done. A turning point is reached when Leo rising can give without asking for anything back.
While it is crucial for those with Leo on the Ascendant to develop a healthy sense of their own power, authority and worth, Aquarius on the Descendant means that they will be confronted by people or situations which urge that life be viewed from a perspective other than that of the personal self. The individual can still be respected but must consider the requirements of the larger system of which he or she is a part. Aquarius on the 7th suggests that one-to-one relationships are a training ground for the sharing and promoting of common goals, thus neutralizing the possibly overly self-centred or egotistical slant of Leo on the 1st. In order to maintain a lasting relationship in which the personality of either party is not quashed, the fire and passion of Leo rising needs to be cooled and contained (but not extinguished) by the airy objectivity and fairness of Aquarius.
Former world heavyweight champion Muhammad Ali was born with Leo rising and its ruler, the Sun, in the 6th. He achieved his sense of greatness and individual worth (Leo on the 1st) through his skilful technique (6th) in the domain of work. The psychologist Anne Dickson, an adept teacher of assertiveness skills, is the author ofAWoman In Your Own Right, an aptly named book for someone with Mars conjunct the Ascendant in Leo and the ruling Sun in the 10th house of career.
Physically, Leo on the Ascendant often manifests in a powerful and proud bearing which commands attention. Depending on the aspects to the Sun, there is sometimes the characteristic ‘sunny’ face and luminous, sparkling eyes.
Virgo on the Ascendant and Pisces on the Descendant
With Virgo rising, the birth into individual selfhood comes through mental analysis, discrimination, self-criticism and the process of defining the self more and more specifically. Often this entails developing greater skill and proficiency in the chosen field of work or area of creative expression. As an earth sign, there is the need to employ knowledge purposefully, to be useful, productive and of service.
Virgo on the Ascendant draws attention to the physical body and the concern for its smooth functioning. The practical management of the mundane necessities of daily life is also an issue for this sign rising.
Virgo in this position can be associated with what might be called ‘the proper assimilation of experience’. Experience, like food, needs to be chewed over and then digested. Catabolic processes in the body separate what is valuable and worth integrating from what is toxic and poisonous. Virgo rising should apply this process to the digestion of life-experience. Through analysing the self and life in general, they can extract from experience whatever is most conducive to their well-being. What is not constructive must be acknowledged and recognized but ultimately cleared out and eliminated. Holding onto such things as negativity and resentment for too long means that the psyche, and sooner or later the body, becomes clogged, weakened and poisoned.
With Virgo rising, there is the danger of becoming so obsessive about order, correctness and precision that a person loses touch with spontaneity and flow. Where Virgo boxes itself in and becomes overly tight and rigid, Pisces appears in one form or another to say ‘relax, let go, relinquish control, and let yourself indulge occasionally’. Pisces on the Descendant encourages Virgo rising to relate with others more compassionately and with a greater degree of sacrifice and acceptance than judgemental and critical Virgos usually allow themselves. Through the Pisces Descendant, Virgo rising gains the kind of understanding that dawns when the heart is open and receptive. There is more to life than just that which can be measured, compartmentalized and tested.
Virgo on the Ascendant usually gives a neat, wiry body, capable of efficient and economical movements. Often the person looks considerably younger than the actual age, and a youthful appearance is retained even in the later years. The placement by sign, house and aspect of its ruling planet Mercury, will shed more light on the person’s appearance as well as his or her major focus of interest. For instance, Jerry Rubin, a 1960s political activist, has Virgo rising with critical Mercury in the 11th house of social reform. Walter Koch, the astrologer and mathematician who painstakingly developed the complex and intricate system of house-division which bears his name, was born with the Sun, Moon, and Venus all rising in Virgo and Mercury in the 1st house.
Libra on the Ascendant and Aries on the Descendant
Whereas Aries rising calls for wilful, decisive and self-assertive action, Libra on the Ascendant requires deliberation and carefully chosen action based on an objective and fair assessment of any situation. In other words, what others need or want will have to be taken into consideration. Reflective judgement is a keynote for this Ascendant: various alternatives are weighed in the balance, and the most appropriate mode of being or acting is selected. However, the capacity to see another person’s point of view as well as the ability to look at any situation from all its sides can be crippling to action. Hence the vacillation, the indecisiveness, and the sitting-on-the-fence reputation of Libra rising.
Choices are more easily made if we have a system of values on which to base them. The responsibility to establish a set of values, standards and ideals upon which action can be gauged rests heavily on the shoulders of this Ascendant. It would be so easy just to let another person decide for them. And even if Libra rising bases its actions on what is believed to be true and just, is there any guarantee that it will all work out beautifully in the end? A friend of mine is an avid sun-worshipper. On those rare days when the sun shines clearly and brightly in England, rather than spending the day at home in her back garden, she acts on her better judgement and dutifully drives to the office. As a reward we might reasonably expect that ‘the gods’ should smile down on her for suchan honourable decision. But why does it always rain on her day off? Libra rising must learn to make choices and then take the consequences for them.
Libra rising also means striking a balance between the ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ sides of life, between mystical urges and practical notions, between ‘head’ and ‘heart’, intuition and logic, and most of all between what we want and need and what others want and need. Libra on the Ascendant searches for the perfect relationship, the ideal philosophy, and for that which is harmonious and pleasing. There is often an interest in the arts and an attraction to such abstract systems as politics or mathematics, which offer symmetry and completeness of concept. Many of Libra rising’s beliefs and ideals may be too high-minded in relation to the harsher realities of life. At the same time, this Ascendant can be very critical when something does not meet what is desired or expected. And those with this placement can be very tough: ‘In the name of harmony you had better see it my way or else.’ (Could this be Aries creeping in?)
Relationships are important to Libra rising, and needed for personal evolution and growth. If Libra is on the Ascendant, then Aries is on the Descendant. In one sense, meeting Aries in the sphere of life associated with the partner elicits Libran qualities. If a partner is strongly self-centred and assertive (an Aries type), then the Libran Ascendant willhaveto learn to adjust and make concessions. However, if the other person becomes too unfair, pushy and demanding, then Libra rising learns to stand up for the self anddemandthe Libran traits of equality and balance. Opposites have a way of turning into one another. If the Libran Ascendant doesn’t like the way you are running the show, you will soon know.
Most textbooks attribute Libra rising with physical charm and a well-proportioned body but with the stipulation that there is a tendency to put on weight due to laziness or over-indulgence. Air signs on the Ascendant generally have a refined rather than coarse look about them.
According to baptismal records, Adolf Hitler was born with Libra rising emphasizing the sometimes overlooked ferocity with which Libra will fight for its philosophy or political ideals, quashing whatever doesn’t fit into its vision of harmony and perfection. For the sake of balance, I would cite examples of the many positive features of the Libra rising temperament in the charts of the sensitive poet Carl Sandburg with Venus in Pisces in the 5th house of creative expression; and Winston Churchill, with ruler Venus in the 3rd house of communication.
Scorpio on the Ascendant and Taurus on the Descendant
In the eighth labour of Hercules, the hero has to find and destroy the Hydra, a nine-headed monster who lives in a cave at the bottom of a murky swamp. At first, he tries to kill the beast while it is still in the water but every time he cuts off a head, three more appear in its place. Finally Hercules remembers the advice of his teacher: ‘We rise by kneeling, we conquer by surrendering, and we gain by giving up.’ He kneels down into the swamp and lifts the Hydra by one of its heads out of the water and into the air. Withdrawn from the water, the Hydra immediately begins to lose its power and wilt. Hercules cuts off all the heads, but a tenth one appears in the form of a precious jewel which he buries under a rock.
This story is closely related to the dynamics of Scorpio on the Ascendant. In one form or another, those with Scorpio rising must confront or grapple with that which is dark, taboo, hidden or destructive. Some will see the beast externally and fight what is dark and evil ‘out there’. Dr Tom Dooley, the humanitarian dedicated to eliminatingsuffering in the world, had Scorpio rising, and Pluto, its ruler, in the 8th. For others, the Hydra lurks in the depths of their own psyches, symbolizing such destructive emotions as jealousy, envy, greed, excessive lust or power drives. Sigmund Freud, a Sun Taurus with Scorpio rising, saw the Hydra in theid– the raw, primitive, instinctual side of our natures.
Hercules succeeded in slaying the Hydra by lifting it out of the swamp and into the air. Similarly, Scorpio rising must bring into the light of consciousness what is dark and hidden inside. If Scorpionic energy is repressed, it seethes underneath, poisoning the psyche and giving rise to a stench which fouls the atmosphere between people. However, if the full force of these emotions is released in an unregenerate manner, their destructive power may be too much to bear.
A third alternative exists. Rather than either repressing the Scorpio side of the nature or acting it out altogether, it is possible to acknowledge the feelings involved and then transform or rechannel them more constructively. Like the jewel which appears when the Hydra is slain, negative complexes can be changed into something precious. Many artists have produced their best works through redirecting passion, anger or rage into a creative outlet. Goethe, the great German writer who tempted Faust with the Devil, had Scorpio rising.
The snake sheds a skin when growth and pressure from the inside renders the old skin too tight. Volcanic Scorpio rising accumulates internal pressure until an explosion, release and renewal must occur. By choice or coercion, this sign on the Ascendant wipes out and removes old forms and structures so that new ones can be built. Gandhi, Lenin, Mussolini, Stalin and Margaret Thatcher all were born with this Ascendant.
There is a depth to Scorpio rising which compels those who have this placement to burrow their way to the root of an issue in search of underlying meanings and motivations. Nothing is taken at face value. Like Bluebeard’s wife, they may open doors which are better left closed. Scorpio rising draws Taurus on the Descendant to itself. Where Scorpio must challenge, attack, destroy and change, Taurus is patient, stable, down-to-earth and preserving. Taurus is equipped to withstand a Scorpio rising’s onslaught and then calmly interject, ‘Don’t forget darling, dinner is at eight.’ Those with Scorpio rising need to develop such Taurean qualities in relationship in order to balance the excesses and extremes of their turbulent and strongly felt passions.
The most obvious physical embodiment of Scorpio rising comes in the form of intense and piercing eyes set in a noticeably penetrating brow.
Sagittarius on the Ascendant and Gemini on the Descendant
The symbol of Sagittarius is the archer or centaur, usually depicted as a creature half-human and half-horse. The upper part shows the human torso aiming an arrow into the heavens, while the lower half, the horse, has its hoofs firmly planted on (or prancing over) the ground. Precariously balanced midway between the beasts and the gods, Sagittarius rising evinces this fundamental dilemma in its approach to life. One part of the nature aspires to great heights, noble ideals and lofty achievements, while another side is driven by more basic and instinctual animal urges. Can the animal side emulate the higher vision? The gap between what is and what could be is often painful for Sagittarius ascending to endure: creative ways to resolve the split need to be found.
Another image associated with Sagittarius is that of the Seeker – there is always further to go, always something else to chase after and pursue. With this as anAscendant, life is best viewed as a journey or pilgrimage. Sometimes the journey itself is more fun than actually getting there: an old motto for the sign is ‘I see the goal; I reach the goal and see another.’
As a fire sign situated on an angular house, Sagittarius rising generates heat and needs an outlet or focus for expressing its energy and enthusiasm. Provided they do not put people off by making too great a display of themselves, those with Sagittarius rising have a knack for inspiring others. This Ascendant also has the ability to imbue events in life with symbolic meaning and importance. Therefore something is not seen as existing in isolation but is appreciated in relation to a larger truth or principle.
The dangers of this Ascendant are those of inflation, overdoing and extravagance. Like Icarus, they may fly too high only to crash down to earth later. Some habitually live beyond their means. Others live too much in the realm of possibilities and never succeed in grounding their vision in concrete terms. How much a problem this is will depend on the strength of the element earth or the principle of Saturn in the rest of the chart.
The house placement of Jupiter, the ruling planet of Sagittarius, may show the area of life through which they believe fulfilment might come. It is also the domain through which they can broaden or expand others, or where they might be prone to excesses.
The former astronaut John Glenn has Sagittarius rising and Jupiter in the 9th house of long journeys. Bob Dylan, the songwriter and singer who inspired a whole generation, was born with Sagittarius rising and Jupiter in the 5th house of creative expression.
Gemini on the Descendant is the necessary counterpoint to Sagittarius on the Ascendant. In the context of a partnership, those with Sagittarius rising can observe at close range the basic laws and patterns of existence which they have intuited. A Gemini-type mate is ideal for them. The Geminian mind can find the precise words to give expression to the broader concepts and feelings of Sagittarius. Gemini can analyse and question the conclusions of Sagittarius and thereby force the latter to think things through more thoroughly. Gemini provides Sagittarius with the immediate practical steps which can be taken in order to realize goals and aspirations. Sagittarius decides it must get away on holiday, but it is the Geminian part of the self which reaches for the telephone directory and finds the number of the travel agent. Again, as with the other Ascendant-Descendant combinations, the Descendant qualities can be imported via another person or they can be developed within the self in the quest for wholeness.
On the physical level, Sagittarius rising may exhibit a high degree of restlessness. Sometimes there is the characteristic broad mouth or ‘horsey’ grin, as if it must be that large to allow room for all they have to say. Because of the expansive nature of this sign, there can be weight problems when it is placed on the Ascendant.
Capricorn on the Ascendant and Cancer on the Descendant
Saturn, the ruler of Capricorn, has a split personality in mythology. On the one hand, we hear about him castrating his father and eating his children. In this sense, he represents a repressive principle – critical, cold and harsh. On the other hand, however, in Roman mythology he ruled over the Golden Age. The Saturnalia was a festival of licence, sensuality, abundance and indulgence – the time of the cornucopia.
The qualities of Capricorn on the Ascendant reflect the dual nature of Saturn. Remembering the general principle that we find ourselves through developing thequalities of the Ascendant, Capricorn there suggests that an appreciation of these two sides of life is needed.
The first side of Capricorn is well documented. With this sign rising, there is often the sense that a stern father watches over them expecting obedience and certain achievements from his children. The energy and enthusiasm of the previous sign, Sagittarius, must be used practically and productively and within defined limits. They cannot just flow or float with whatever comes along or allow themselves to be swept away by every whim or passion. In order to meet the requirements of thefather-in-oneself,Capricorn rising has to cautiously plan and structure the life, building logically and slowly towards achieving goals and ambitions. Energy must be carefully measured out and this calls for discipline and control. Capricorn rules the knees and sooner or later those with this Ascendant must bend in submission to a higher authority – internal or external – which expects something of them. Like Job, it is often through hardship and frustration that Capricorn rising is humbled and learns to accept certain laws, limits and structures. Like Christ, there may be doubts at the last minute whether the sacrifices were all worth it.
In short, Capricorn rising needs to ‘make something of the self’ and achieve some degree of collective validation and respect. They may rebel and try to escape lessons and responsibilities, but eventually it dawns that they simply feel better if they face obligations, whether to themselves or others.
What about the other side of Saturn – the deity who ruled over the Golden Age? As a cardinal earth sign, Capricorn has the capacity to operate very efficiently in the material world. Through developing their potential adeptness in handling and organizing practical affairs, Capricorn rising experiences a sense of fulfilment and accomplishment. Next to Virgo, no other Ascending sign is better capable of creating order out of chaos than Capricorn, or taking a vision of possibilities and making it real. And we mustn’t forget the Pan or Satyr side of earthy Capricorn – the capacity to enjoy the physical senses and the natural world. Perhaps it is because Capricorn rising is so aware of the harsher realities of life, that they can, by contrast, savour that which is sensual and beautiful.
Capricorn rising has the feeling and watery sign of Cancer on the Descendant. The soft-edged, fleshy and rounded image of Cancer opposes and naturally moderates the rigidity and inflexibility of Capricorn. Capricorn rising may look so tough to the world, but often runs home to be pampered and mothered by its mate. In spite of an external hardness or diffidence, those with Capricorn on the Ascendant are unusually sensitive to the feelings of those close to them and often adapt themselves to meet their partners’ needs. The stern and judging Father is mediated by the all-accepting and protective Mother. If in one sphere of life we go too far in one direction, life compensates for it in other places.
Many astrologers believe that Capricorn rising, like good wine, matures or ripens well, becoming better and happier with time. Physically, Capricorn on the cusp of the 1st often appears fairly wiry and lean, and there is usually something distinctive about the bone structure in the face. Sometimes, like Pan and his followers, they look a little devilish.
Machiavelli is an example of the harsher and more stringent side of Capricorn rising. He used his sensitivity to other people (Cancer on the Descendant) as a means of better manipulating and controlling situations to his gain. Yehudi Menuhin, the great violinist, is an example of the side of Capricorn rising which will work hard anddiscipline the self to bring gifts and talents to the world (ruling Saturn is in the 7th along with Neptune, the planet of music).
Aquarius on the Ascendant and Leo on the Descendant
Ironically, those with Aquarius on the Ascendant (the point of self-awareness) gain a clearer sense of their own unique and particular identity through standing back and taking an objective and impersonal look at life. Viewing events, people, circumstances and even themselves from a detached perspective affords them a more global or complete picture of the plan of things. A greater awareness of ‘the group’ and a heightened sense of the social context in which they function supersedes a purely subjective or personal frame of reference.
As discussed under the 11th house, Aquarius is co-ruled by Saturn and Uranus. The Saturn side of Aquarius rising may look to a group to enhance its own sense of identity or importance. Along with this comes concerns about belonging to the ‘right’ group, doing the ‘right’ things, etc. The more Uranian side of Aquarius on the Ascendant, however, may feel it is inappropriate to conduct the life solely for augmenting or bolstering personal security or power. Something larger than the individual self needs to be considered.
On this basis, more than any other Ascending sign, Aquarius rising can act in accordance with what he or she feels will support or improve the functioning of the greater whole. The sign of Aquarius has been associated with the myth of Prometheus. Believing that humankind could be better off than it already was, Prometheus stole fire from the gods to give to man. Similarly, Aquarius rising can best meet life with a sense of hope and vision of a new future: a belief that with the application of the right theories or concepts, circumstances could be improved. But just as Prometheus is punished by the existing powers for his defiant deed, some modern-day Prometheans may be condemned, mistreated or even imprisoned for theories or actions which transgress or threaten the established authority. And yet, it is the nature of life that old structures and paradigms, when outlived or past their usefulness, give way to fresh patterns and ideas. Aquarius rising is often in tune with the latest trends and new ideas in the atmosphere.
Usually the ideals associated with Aquarius rising are egalitarian – brotherhood, sisterhood, solidarity, fairness, equality and justice for all. For these ends, Aquarius on the Ascendant may assume the cause of segments of society which the existing system condemns or oppresses. (Abraham Lincoln, reputedly born at sunrise, is believed to have had Aquarius on the Ascendant.) Sometimes the vision of this Ascendant is too idealistic and underestimates the force of the more greedy, territorial and acquisitive nature of people. Similarly, those with this Rising sign are often ill at ease with irrational and self-centred emotions in themselves or others which conflict with their noble and utopian theories. Immanuel Kant, the German philosopher who wrote on ethics and aesthetics, had Aquarius on the 1st. The clear-eyed mystic philosopher Krishnamurti was born with Aquarius rising and Uranus in the 9th house of higher understanding.
Leo on the Descendant is the shadow side of Aquarius on the Ascendant. Beneath the cool objectivity and the egalitarian ideals of Aquarius may lurk the Leo urges for personal power and recognition. Those with Aquarius rising, with all their love of equality and freedom, are often attracted to prestigious and influential people. There may even be a tendency to use others as a means of gaining strength, power and importance (Leo on the 7th). For all their lack of self-centredness, they may sulk forhours if somebody makes them look silly at a party. (The other person will probably get the cold shoulder for days.) Leo feels passionately and intensely and uses its own sense of self, honour and prestige as a primary frame of reference. To avoid some form of Leo backlash, either from within or without, Aquarius rising is well-advised not to overly denigrate the Leo approach to life. With Aquarius, there is the danger that the needs of the efficiently functioning system will take precedence over the uniqueness, humanness and creative individuality of those who must fit into it. Taken to extremes, the Aquarian dream could too easily turn into an Orwellian nightmare.
Physically, Aquarius rising tends towards a broad build with clear, refined, light and open features. Often there is an electric or magnetic charge in the aura.
Pisces on the Ascendant and Virgo on the Descendant
Pisces rising can embody any of the various manifestations associated with this complex and elusive sign. Like the two fishes swimming in opposite directions in the glyph, the urge to form a concrete and solid sense of ego-identity conflicts with those forces which encourage the dissolution and transcendence of ego-boundaries. The resolution to this dilemma requires that the person with Pisces rising develop an identity which does not exclude the awareness of being part of something greater than the self. Too rigid a personality would make this impossible, and yet too diffuse an identity would create difficulties in effectively dealing with life. In the former situation, nothing beyond the ego-boundaries could filter into the awareness, while in the latter case, the person is overwhelmed by his or her sensitivity and openness. The dangers are inflexibility on the one hand and chaos and disintegration on the other.
Pisces on the Ascendant may manifest on any of the three levels traditionally associated with this sign: the victim, the artist or the healer/saviour. The victim does not cope well with the more difficult realities of the world and seeks an escape route or crutch – perhaps turning to drugs or alcohol as a way of release. Vague and confused, Pisces rising may flow with whatever is happening, letting other people make choices for them. Some may try to escape the net of daily tedium and entrapment within traditional societal frameworks, turning to crime, underground activity and villainous behaviour.
However, another expression of this sign on the Ascendant is the artistic type. Inspired by the imaginal realms of the psyche, the artist channels his or her perceptions through some sort of medium. The third level, the healer or saviour, dedicates the life to serving others, endeavouring to make real a vision of life glimpsed in a more expanded state of consciousness. Pain ‘out there’ in the world is felt as their own pain. On all three levels, to varying degrees, this Ascendant is taken over by something which obliterates or supersedes a more mundane existence or limited view of life.
A keynote for Pisces rising is the sacrifice of the personal will. However, if taken to an extreme, those with this Ascendant may repeatedly set up situations through which others take advantage of them. Besides being trampled on like the proverbial doormat, a lack of clear prohibitions and boundaries often means abandoning the self to emotions and appetites which in the long run are excessive and self-destructive. Virgo on the Descendant provides the balancing principles of discrimination, common sense and a healthy respect of caution and limits. Others may need to provide these qualities but ultimately those with Pisces rising are much better off if they can find such traits within themselves. Some with this configuration will be so absorbed in spiritual ecstasies orhigh-flown missions that they will require partners to manage the more trivial and mundane necessities of everyday life (Virgo on the 7th). Sometimes the Pisces rising type will be so idealistic and romantic that unconsciously they are highly critical and condemning of others (Virgo Descendant) for not living up to their expectations. Others with Pisces rising derive their identity solely through rescuing or serving others (Virgo on the 7th).
Physically, Pisces on the 1st may have a dreamy, romantic or mysterious quality in the face. The eyes may be large and almost like liquid. Often the overall features are soft and rounded. Like plastic, they can mould their looks into different shapes. In their manner, they may exude a receptivity and willingness-to-please allure which charms and seduces others. Sometimes they exhibit such a degree of helplessness that others are inspired to come to their rescue.
The famous conductor Leopold Stokowski was born with Pisces rising and Neptune, its ruler, in Taurus in the 2nd house. Pisces on the 1st gives the openness to music, and Neptune in earthy Taurus in the 2nd enabled him to concretely channel or literally ‘conduct’ his inspiration. Swinburne, the dissolute English poet whose poetic voice in many ways articulated the Pre-Raphaelite movement, had Pisces rising and Neptune in the 11th house of groups.
The Ascendant Complex
It has already been mentioned that a number of factors influences the workings of the Ascendant in addition to what sign is on the 1st house cusp. These include:
1. The ruling planet of the sign on the Ascendant, and its placement by sign, house and aspects.
2. Planets near the Ascendant (within ten degrees of the cusp either in the 1st or 12th houses).
3. Aspects to the Ascendant itself.
The Ruling Planet
The planet which rules the sign on the cusp of the 1st house, known as the ruler of the Ascendant and sometimes referred to as the chart ruler, suggests how the sign on the Ascendant may seek expression. Its position by sign, house and aspect should be carefully scrutinized.
For example, if Aries is rising, then Mars is the ruling planet. The elemental placement of Mars shows what stimulates the Aries rising. Mars in a fire sign is aroused by something it envisions or intuits. In a water sign, Mars is stimulated by emotions and feelings. Mars in air is excited by something it contemplates or thinks, while Mars in earth is motivated by a sense of something practical or concrete to be gained by action. If Mars is in watery Cancer or Pisces, the physical vitality of the Aries rising is less obvious than if Mars is in the fiery signs of Aries, Leo or Sagittarius.
The house placement of the ruler of the Ascendant suggests the area of life where important experiences which directly influence growth and self-discovery are met. Continuing with Aries rising as an example, the house placement of its ruler Mars will elaborate on the field of experience which requires the Aries need for action and decisiveness. If Mars is in the 2nd house, the person should develop greater potency handling money and the material world. If Mars is in the 3rd house, enhancing self-expression, communication skills and developing the intellect yield a fuller sense of self.
Aspects to the ruling planet shed light on the way a person functions as well as the manner and direction the expression of the Ascendant takes. For example, the quality and direction of energy exhibited by an Aries rising with Mars conjunct Jupiter will be very different from the Aries rising with Mars conjunct Saturn.
The size of the 1st house will depend on whether a sign of long ascension or short ascension is rising relative to the hemisphere in which the person is born, and also on the house system chosen in setting up the chart. Some people will have a very large 1st house, sometimes an arc of as much as sixty degrees. They may have one sign on the Ascendant, another intercepted, and a portion of a third sign leading into the next house. All of the qualities represented by the signs there will need to be developed in some way, although the sign on the cusp will carry the most weight. The placement of the ruling planet of any sign in the 1st house can be examined in the same way as the ruler of the Ascending sign.
Planets near the Ascendant
Planets on or near the Ascendant (within ten degrees either in the 12th or the 1st) enhance or modify Ascendant qualities. If Aries is rising, but Neptune is conjunct the Ascendant, the urge to assert the self is affected by the sensitivity and diffuseness of Neptune. However, if Jupiter or Uranus should be there instead, the person’s will-power and directness are increased.
Aspects to the Ascendant
Planets aspecting the Ascendant itself will show whether other qualities in the person are in harmony or conflict with the type of expression required by the sign on the Ascendant. For instance, Saturnsquaringan Aries Ascendant might suggest that the person’s fear, caution or reserve (Saturn) inhibits the full force of the Rising sign. If Saturnopposesthe Ascendant, the person may feel restricted by others. Saturnsextileortrinethe Aries Ascendant suggests that the person knows just the right amount of effort to apply in a given situation and also possesses a good degree of discipline and practicality to further achieving objectives. In short, both the nature of the planet and the nature of the aspect need to be taken into consideration to judge its influence on the Ascendant in question.
