The Twelve Houses

18.THE SUN AND LEO THROUGH THE HOUSES

The symbol for the Sun is a circle with a dot in the middle. The circle, which has no beginning or end, stands for unboundedness and infinity, and the dot represents the individual as a separate entity – who has his or her own personal identity and yet is part of that greater whole. The Ascendant is the path we follow to find who we are, but the Sun is what we discover or what we seek to become. Through developing the qualities of the sign the Sun is in, and through encountering the sphere of life designated by its house placement, we gain a greater sense of our power, purpose and direction in life.
Very simply, the house position of the Sun indicates where we need to distinguish ourselves in some way – to radiate our influence, shine forth, stand out and be special. It is the area of life through which we separate from the archetypal Mother, recognizing our own individual identity rather than remaining fused with the rest of creation. While the Moon is swayed by deeply embedded instincts and habit patterns from the past, the Sun has the power to provoke change, to implement choice, and to create fresh alternatives in the area of the chart in which it is found. Just as the Sun in the heavens is the centre of our solar system and influences the planets to revolve around it, the position of the Sun in the birthchart shows where we ought to develop the power to be self-generating and causal rather than merely reactive.
Like the hero in the world’s myths, the Sun’s house placement is where we have to fight dragons, confront life, and overcome obstacles and forces which hinder our advancement and unfoldment. Expanding and developing in the Sun’s domain usually involves a struggle, which, if successful, enables us to emerge forth with a more solid and coherent sense of ‘I’.
The significance of the Sun in a house is similar to the influence that Leo has on a house – whether Leo is on the cusp, intercepted, or completing a house which has Cancer on the cusp. In the following analysis of the Sun through the houses, a sense of the meaning of Leo in each house can also be gleaned. (For instance, if you have Leo on the cusp of the 2nd, or contained in the 2nd, then you can read the section headed the Sun in the 2nd to learn more about how Leo in the 2nd might manifest.)
Also note that the house with Leo on the cusp (or some or all of Leo contained within it) will somehow be related to the house in which the Sun is placed. For example, the French poet Jean Cocteau was born with the Sun in the 3rd house ruling Leo on the cusp of the 5th. In an effort to communicate his ideas to others (Sun in the 3rd) he explored a wide range of artistic media (Leo on the 5th) including film, verse, novels, theatre and set design. He kept experimenting with his creative style (5th) in order to express himself as fully as possible (Sun in the 3rd).
Sun in the 1st
Those born with the Sun in the 1st are born just before sunrise when the creative forces of day and light are gaining supremacy over the darkness of night. As the Sun edges its way over the horizon, the planet wakes up – hidden things become visible, greateractivity commences, and people drag themselves out of bed and into the world. The Sun in this position has an obvious stimulating effect on life and those born at this time should have a similar impact. These people are meant to influence and catch the attention of others, to radiate their power in such a way that others are attracted to their energy and warmth. They should meet life with vigour, enthusiasm and the determination to make something of themselves. Rather than relying on the family background to feel important and gain a sense of identity, they need to forge their own ‘place in the Sun’ and be appreciated and respected for what they themselves can do, create or make happen. These people should not go unnoticed. They require a position in life which exercises their natural authority and fulfils their desire for recognition.
The constitution should be strong if the Sun is in the 1st, although this will very much depend on the sign it is in and aspects to it. When the Sun and the Ascendant are in the same sign, astrologers say that the person is a ‘double Aries’, ‘double Taurus’, etc. In this case, they usually clearly exemplify and embody the qualities of that sign. For instance, the great emancipator and advocate of personal freedom, Abraham Lincoln, was born around sunrise with the Sun and Ascendant in egalitarian Aquarius. The American television star Ed Asner (formerly the lead inLou Grant) was born with the Sun rising in Scorpio. In courageously speaking out against what he felt were political injustices he could not tolerate (Sun in Scorpio in 1st) he upset the show business establishment and gravely disrupted his life and career (Scorpio Sun rules Leo on the 10th house of career and reputation).
If the Sun is well-aspected in the 1st, the influence of the early environment is likely to be supportive of the person’s desire to express his or her individuality. Usually their birth will draw much attention, as if to corroborate their need to feel important. A negative expression of the Sun in the 1st may be an overbearing personality, extreme egocentricity, and excessive pride. Those who do not manage to express or develop a healthy outlet for their power and authority may turn bitter and cynical. Rather than being resentful if their worth is not acknowledged unquestioningly, they should recognize that admiration and appreciation from others must be earned first.
Sun in the 2nd
If the Sun or Leo is in the 2nd house, this area of life should be met with vitality and forcefulness: there is a pressing need to develop personal skills, values and resources to achieve a sense of individuality. They need to find and define what constitutes security for them, rather than relying on other people to provide safety, money or resources. A sense of power and self-worth can be gained through acquiring money and possessions and through the ability to manage and organize the material world. Some may incline towards status-seeking, showiness and extravagance to prove their value and enhance an insecure internal identity. They can be generous with money and possessions but usually expect some sort of recognition in return. Wherever the Sun is, is where the personal ego is seeking acknowledgement. The impeccable, internationally loved singer and actor Maurice Chevalier had the Sun in Virgo in the 2nd: he was born in a slum and died a millionaire.
The nature of whatever planet is in the 2nd house is valued because those qualities offer us security. Therefore, with the Sun in the 2nd, security comes through developing and possessing such attributes as strength, nobility, authority, a sense of specialness, and courage. People with this placement will feel safer in life if they foster these traits, regardless of how much money is in the bank.

Sun in the 3rd
Rather than just absorbing and reflecting attitudes and influences from the environment, these people should develop and honour their own thoughts, views and perspective on things. A sense of value, worth and power comes through strengthening the intellect and communication abilities. Often they feel the most alive when they are learning something, or when they can be sharing and exchanging their ideas and knowledge with others. Those with the Sun in the 3rd (or Leo in this house) need to feel heard and to be noticed in the immediate environment. Consequently, rivalry with siblings and competitiveness among peers could be issues worth investigating. Some may project their own need for power and authority onto a brother or sister. Or knowledge itself is worshipped like the Sun. Difficult aspects to the Sun in the 3rd could indicate problems with early schooling. These will need to be examined if learning is to proceed unfettered. No matter how clever or articulate the 3rd house Sun appears to others, those with this placement normally feel that they could still know more or communicate better. The American writer Philip Roth, author of many best-selling books and known for his repartee and quick wit, was born with the Sun in the 3rd. The Nobel Prize-winning author George Bernard Shaw, who espoused his personal philosophy through his writing, was born with the Sun in Leo in this house.
Sun in the 4th (and Leo on the IC)
Those with the Sun in the 4th need to delve deep inside to find themselves. What is achieved in the outer world is perhaps less important than what is accomplished in terms of soul-growth and inner spiritual development.
The struggle to define the self rages on the home front. They need to distinguish their own individual identity as distinct from the family background without denying that they are also part of the family. On one side, the danger is deriving the identity too much from the ancestry and becoming just a replica of what it represents or how it has shaped them. On the other side, however, there is the danger of totally rejecting the background altogether as a means of freeing themselves from its imposition. The first instance denies their own uniqueness and originality; the second denies their ‘fate’ – their biological and psychological roots. The task at hand is somehow combining the two: acknowledging their heredity and links with the family of origin, and yet at the same time developing an identity in their own right. They may carry something of the tradition of the family, and yet do it in their own way.
If the 4th house is taken to be the father, energies here may be experienced through the father or projected onto him. Those with the Sun in this house might have experienced the father as so powerful and authoritative that they subsequently cannot surmount a crippling sense of their own smallness or inferiority. They may have to do battle with the father to sever the hold he has on them. In other cases, the father may have been physically or psychologically absent. For the boy-child this could mean that there wasn’t a clear sense of a father upon which to model his own masculine qualities. These would have to be found from within the self. For the girl-child, the experience of the absent father could entail a lifetime search for the lost father. She, too, would ultimately need to ‘find’ father qualities inside.
There is a strong need to own their own homes where they can exercise authority and influence. Sometimes there is a prolonged search for the right place to root.
The Sun in the 4th suggests that they come more into their own in the second half of life. A renewed sense of creative potency, vitality, and the joys of self-expression are potentially available in the later years.
The nature of the Sun in the 4th is similar to Leo on the IC. A deep need to express their own unique and special identity is the foundation upon which much of the life is built.
Sun in the 5th
The Sun is strongly placed in the 5th, its natural domain. For those with this placement, a sense of identity, power and purpose in life is found through wholeheartedly engaging in activities which make them feel good about being alive. The need to give expression to the self is vital to physical and psychological health and people become ill and depressed if they have nothing to live for. Of course, they also fall sick if they are trying to pack too much in. It is not a case of how much the 5th house Sun can do, but rather thequalityof the involvement and the degree of satisfaction which is obtained from it.
Some form of artistic expression is advised – not necessarily in order to be another Mozart (Sun in Aquarius in the 5th) or Matisse (Sun in Capricorn in the 5th), but more for the sake of freeing the spirit, releasing emotions and feelings, and having the opportunity to create from inside the self. The richness of life is also enhanced through hobbies, sporting events, recreational pursuits, trips to the theatre, art galleries, etc.
The ‘playful child’ is alive and well in someone with a 5th house Sun and struggling to be free. No matter how creative people with this placement may appear to others, they usually feel they could be better at whatever it is they do. The Sun by nature is expansive and in the 5th it seeks to express itself more and more and continually increase its territory of influence. A good example of the spirit of the Sun in the 5th is Sir Richard Burton, the scholarly English explorer who wrote about his adventures in exotic lands. His 5th house Sun ruled Leo in the 9th and 10th houses of long journeys and career.
For those with the Sun in the 5th, love affairs and romance heighten their sense of participation in life as well as embellishing their feelings of specialness. Producing children is another way they can bolster their sense of identity as well as extending their power and influence. There is a danger, though, that a parent with this placement could attempt to ‘live out’ his or her life too much through a child, projecting unfulfilled needs for fame and glory onto the offspring. The child might be exhibited like a work of art in the hopes that what has been ‘produced’ will be praised.
The need to be the centre of attention is very strong with the Sun in the 5th and these people may be unable to tolerate situations in which all eyes are not focused on them. A difficultly aspected Sun in this house could resort to devious, manipulative or exaggerated ways of gaining attention: even negative ‘strokes’ are better than no ‘strokes’ at all.
Sun in the 6th
With the Sun in the 6th, the experiences needed to develop a solid ego-identity revolve around health, daily ritual and work. Without becoming unduly obsessive, those with this placement should pay particular attention to matters of self-improvement. Physical and psychological weaknesses and imperfections are often highlighted in some way so that necessary adjustments can be made.
First and foremost, they need to form a good relationship to the body – respecting the physical vehicle is a lesson they sooner or later must learn. Unfortunately, for some, the recognition of the importance of caring for the body only registers when the consequences of neglect and ill-treatment have gone too far and manifested in illness. And yet, even if difficulties do arise in this area, the quest back to health and wholeness will serve the larger process of individuation more appropriately than other paths. They also have the ability to enlighten and illumine other people about better ways to participate in maintaining good health.
Those with the Sun in the 6th should strive to develop skills and abilities which secure them a useful place in the employment market. A sense of personal worth, value, and distinction is obtained in this way. They ‘find themselves’ through being of service to others.
There is a need to organize effective daily rituals and routines which ensure a smoother running of the life. Learning to function efficiently in practical matters strengthens the sense of identity. This is not the placement of someone who should just sit and meditate all day. It is surprising what poignant realizations can dawn scrubbing the kitchen floor or washing your socks. With the Sun in the 6th, accepting boundaries and routines empowers a person to perfect and refine the art of living. The end results of this attitude are not necessarily glaring, but show ever so subtly and tastefully in all the person does, recalling a Zen saying: ‘Before enlightenment carry water, after enlightenment carry water.’
Sun in the 7th
When the philosopher Martin Buber wrote that ‘Man becomes an I through a You,’ he could have been referring to those with the Sun in the 7th. Almost paradoxically, a sense of their own power, purpose and individuality is found through partnership and relationship. Participating in joint activities raises issues which enable them to define who they are more clearly. Through the ups and downs and entanglements encountered in the attempt to form vital, honest and life-supporting alliances, the identity is shaped and strengthened. It is a fact of life that something exists more clearly if it can be seen in relation to something else; likewise, a personality has more meaning when seen in relation to other personalities. When the Sun shines in Libra’s house, the ‘I’ needs a ‘Thou’.
However, it doesn’t always work this way. In some cases, those with the Sun in the 7th may try to abscond with another person’s identity by finding someone who will be big and strong for them or who will tell them what to do with their lives. Or they may be preoccupied with gaining prestige and authority through aligning themselves with an important or influential figure, or by looking for a hero or heroine they can serve, worship and forever adore. In a man or woman’s chart, the Sun here can indicate a search for a ‘daddy’ figure. In short, an attempt is made to ‘live out’ the solar principle through projecting it onto the partner. This is different to discovering the self via the help of another. It is also less productive, and often doesn’t succeed for very long.
The 7th house also depicts how we interact with society in general. For the sake of the individuation process, those with the Sun in the 7th need to be involved with people. Princess Diana of England, whose marriage to Prince Charles became the focus of world attention and made her a celebrity in her own right, had the Sun in the 7th. Some may even find a vocation which deals with the issues of interpersonal relationships –marriage guidance counselling, for instance, or work which requires skill in arbitration and diplomacy. Leo on the Descendant is similar in meaning to the Sun in the 7th.
Sun in the 8th
On a deep level, we all yearn to reconnect with something greater than the self. Although often oblivious to such underlying motivations, those with the Sun in the 8th seek to expand themselves and transcend their personal limitations and separateness through some form of union and interchange with other people. This can be achieved in a variety of ways and on many different levels. For instance, some people with the Sun here augment their identity, value and worth by drawing to them other people’s money and possessions. At worst, this is premeditated and conniving (not unlike a formal invitation to a midnight feast at Count Dracula’s castle). More often, however, it just happens that other people naturally want to help those with an 8th house Sun – shower them with gifts, leave them inheritances, bestow grants upon them, etc. Frequently the urge to invest their energies in joint or collective enterprises brings them into the realm of business, banking, insurance and anything to do with other people’s money and resources.
But money and possessions are just the surface level of what is shared and exchanged between people. Feelings and emotions circulating in the invisible undercurrents which connect one person to another also demand the attention of an 8th house Sun. Although these may appear to be the brainchild of a sadistic god who has watched too many soap operas on television, relationships which expose hidden passions and trigger the primal emotions of unresolved childhood complexes also serve the solar processes of growth and unfoldment. Releasing psychic content from the bondage and repetition of patterns established years before in the nursery, intimate partnerships act as catalysts for breakdown, regeneration and change. For those with the Sun in the 8th, relationships are not something to dip a toe into for refreshment every once in a while; they must learn to swim in these waters. Some may try to avoid real intimacy altogether, but in doing so they cheat themselves of transformation.
The 8th house Sun usually bestows an interest in that which is hidden, occult, or mysterious in life. Sometimes there is a fascination or preoccupation with death or any subject which society considers taboo. The daredevil Evel Knievel who constantly tests his strength and power performing death-defying stunts was born with the heroic Sun in this house. The film director, Sam Peckinpah, whose movies expose the more violent undercurrents of life, has the Sun in Pisces here. Hugh Hefner, the founder ofPlayboymagazine, one of the first widely circulated publications to write openly on sex, has the Sun in Aries in the 8th.
Sun in the 9th
Those with this placement should strive to broaden their understanding and perspective on life. This can be achieved through travel, extensive reading, flights of the imagination, or through philosophical enquiry into the ‘whys and wherefores’ of existence. The capacity to perceive deeper meanings and patterns which operate in the collective and personal spheres of life, vitalizes and empowers the Sun in this house.
As with any Sagittarian emphasis, life is best viewed as a journey or pilgrimage. In fact, some may come to believe, like the Spanish writer Cervantes, that ‘the road is better than the inn.’ Rather than swallowing whole any one belief system, insightgained through the exploration of different groups, philosophies or religions can be distilled into a personal vision of the truth. Sharing and exchanging their insights with others helps them to distinguish themselves.
There is the danger of becoming so overly concerned with ‘the big picture’ and abstract issues of life that they lose touch with everyday reality. Obsessed with what the future might bring, an immediate here-and-now participation in life is somehow lost in the shuffle. They may be so busy planning life and mapping out the future that they forget to live it. Sometimes they abound with good advice and counsel for others, and yet never quite manage to apply it to their own predicaments.
This placement suits a variety of vocations. They may excel at public relations work where they promote a concept or vision to inspire other people. They are adept at ‘selling trips’ – extolling the virtues of an African holiday, for instance, even though they may have never been there themselves. They make excellent managers and coaches, directing and organizing others towards achieving some common goal. They fire others with their enthusiasm and vision, and often spread knowledge through teaching, writing or publishing.
Sun in the 10th (and Leo on the MC)
With the Sun in the 10th, the identity is bound up with career and professional achievements. The 10th house describes the qualities in ourselves which we wish others to notice: in this case, the Sun strives to be seen as emanating power, strength and authority in respect to the sign in which it is placed. The Sun in Gemini there, for instance, wants the power of its intellect acknowledged; the Sun in Pisces craves recognition for its power to heal, enchant, or inspire, etc.
The Sun in the 10th has a deep urge to be admired as ‘a Somebody’. Some degree of ambition should be ‘owned’ and satisfied if they are to fulfil their life-purpose. Examples of people born with this placement include the business executive John DeLorean (Sun in Capricorn) who tirelessly worked to make a name for himself; the actor Mickey Rooney (Sun in Libra), a childhood star who made his way ‘to the top’ and stayed there; and General Rommel (Sun in Scorpio) whose cunning as a field-marshal earned him the nickname ‘the desert fox’. Women with this placement who do not satisfy their own need to achieve through a career may be drawn to prestigious or successful men as partners (the ‘Hollywood wives’ syndrome). For either sex, conflicts between the home and personal life versus achieving publicly and professionally are shown by oppositions from the 4th house to the 10th house Sun. The kind of self-exertion, dedication and perseverance required to ascend the ladder of success often limits the freedom and spontaneity to move in other directions. Another danger with this placement is that the sense of identity or worth could rely too much on their title or position in the world. Should that be lost, they are left totally bereft and annihilated.
If the 10th house is taken to be the mother, then the Sun in this position makes her very important. The child with the Sun here could project his or her own identity and power onto the mother: her needs and wants become the child’s needs and wants. Conversely, this placement sometimes indicates a mother who requires that the child mirror her, imposing her own individuality onto the offspring, as in the classic example of the ‘stage mother’. (‘I’m a frustrated actress, so my child is going to learn to act.’) Usually there is a collusion here: the child worships and adores the mother and offers the self up to her – ‘You want me as your showpiece and I want to be that for you.’ Atsome point, those with the Sun in the 10th must examine how much they are doing something for themselves, and how much it is being done to win Mother’s love.
Leo on the MC or contained within the 10th house implies some of the same meaning as the Sun there.
Sun in the 11th
Those with the Sun in the 11th establish a more cogent sense of identity through social, humanitarian or political activities. The phrase ‘no man is an island’ is commonplace, but it still has particular significance for this placement.
In some way, the identity should be linked to a larger unit than the individual self. Personal recognition could be gained through group involvement, and it is not unusual for someone with the Sun here to rise to a position of prominence or wield influence within various kinds of organizations. The nature of the experiences encountered through group situations – how easily a person functions or adjusts in this sphere – can be seen by aspects to the Sun in this house. The person may be a channel through which new currents or trends entering the collective could manifest. The American ‘muckraking’ writer Upton Sinclair, who fought for new legislation protecting the work-force against the evils of big industry, was born with the Sun conjunct Mars in Virgo in the 11th.
There is a danger that the identity could be bought wholesale by aligning the self with a group, belief system or cause. In this instance, it’s not a case of you are what you eat, but you are what the group feeds you. Those with the Sun in the 11th need to distinguish carefully between what they believe and what the group tells them they ought to believe. (Gay black vegetarians don’t all have to think alike!)
Friendships are important to the full development of the Sun in this house. Those with this placement could have a marked impact on close friends and conversely friends could open new vistas and be helpful in the achievement of goals and objectives. As with groups and belief systems, taken to an extreme, some sort of divine potency could be projected onto friends.
It is wise for people with the Sun in the 11th to make a conscious effort to set themselves feasible goals towards which to aim. Somehow, their efforts to realize these will contribute towards the formation of a more solid and concrete sense of identity, purpose and power. One of the most vital ingredients in the self-healing process is having a reason to live.
Sun in the 12th
There is a basic archetypal discrepancy between the solar principle and the essence of the 12th house. The Sun’s task is to establish, clarify and perpetuate a separate identity, while the 12th house dispatches forces which threaten to dissolve, undermine, destructure and overwhelm the boundaries of the individual ego. Resolving the conflict requires that the person’s sense of ‘I’ extends in scope beyond the more normal or usual reaches of consciousness. With the Sun in the 12th the ego must play its part as a servant of the soul.
Those with the Sun in the 12th need to learn how to straddle the borders between personal and universal, conscious and unconscious, individual ego and collective self. This is challenging: the personal ego needs to be flexible enough to allow entry to these elements and yet not so weak that it is overwhelmed by them.
In the effort to maintain a solid and firm identity, the person may reject the existence of a personal or collective unconscious altogether. In the name of clarity and reason, barriers are erected to prohibit the entry of anything fuzzy, vague, irrational, mystical or transpersonal. The daytime border patrol follows the orders of the ego with the utmost alertness and alacrity, but the nightwatchmen are notoriously inefficient. As soon as they fall asleep on the job, what has been hidden or kept out of consciousness slips through and invades. (It was Robert Frost who wrote ‘Something there is that doesn’t love a wall.’) The next morning the day patrol is back at work and the intruders are driven out once more. And so it goes on – vast reserves of psychic energy are spent keeping one part of ourselves away from another part. Alienated from aspects of our own make-up, it is not surprising that we suffer so much conflict and disease, not to mention the feeling of being cut off from other people. The Sun in the 12th, however, is given the opportunity to join the two sides of the self – personal and universal, conscious and unconscious – in an attempt to help these make friends with one another.
The coalition between the forces of the ego and the hidden, deeper realm of the psyche is potentially very fruitful. Those with the Sun in this house can act as channels or mediums for the expression of mythic or archetypal images in the collective unconscious, whether it is through art, poetry, dance, music or some form of psychic work. Their sensitivity and openness to that which is beyond the requirements of the personal self make them effective servants and healers who respond to the needs of others. They may be used as vessels for invoking changes on the level of the collective. In some way the personal identity meets and incorporates something larger and more universal.
In line with traditional 12th house associations, those with the Sun here may need to spend a good deal of time on their own. So receptive to others, they continually absorb influences from the environment. Periods of withdrawal and retreat help them to shed what they have ‘picked up’ and regain a sense of their own boundaries again. Sometimes, crisis and confinement precede an experience of awakening and illumination. Others may be so confused and undermined by unconscious forces or outside elements that leading an ordinary day-to-day existence is severely hampered.
Various forms of institutions may play a part in their lives. The vocation could involve work in hospitals, prisons, museums, libraries, etc. Certain astrological texts suggest that those with the Sun in the 12th have used their will-power too selfishly in a previous lifetime. Now they must employ their power for the sake of other people, or have the experience of being at the mercy of somebody else’s authority. Hidden pride and arrogance or the unconscious belief that the world owes them a living and should without question recognize them as special could cause problems.
The Sun is a ‘male principle’ and in the nebulous 12th it could mean some confusion around the father or other males in the life, or sacrifices to be made regarding them. Sometimes, there is a strong psychic link with the father.
Notes – Chapter 181. Thomas Mann cited in Jaffee,The Myth of Meaning, Penguin Books, New York, 1975, p. 30.

