The Twelve Houses

19.THE MOON AND CANCER THROUGH THE HOUSES

The Moon in the heavens has no light of its own – it only reflects the light of the Sun. Unlike the Sun, which shows where effort is required to become a conscious individual, the Moon is that area of life in which there is a natural tendency to blend in and adapt to what is given. The Moon’s house is where we are sensitive and responsive to the needs and influences of other people. It is where we are more easily moulded, shaped by habit and past conditioning, and likely to be bound by the notions, expectations, values and standards of our family or culture. Some of these inbred patterns may be worthwhile and constructive, while others might hinder or retard progress in new directions. The domain of the Moon is the area of life into which we retreat when we need a rest, pause or sanctuary from the struggle of individuation and consciousness raising.
We are drawn into the sphere of life that houses the Moon out of a need for belonging, comfort or safety. It is where we findor playMother: we look for security, containment or an anchor in its domicile or else we offer others nurturing or support in that spectrum of experience.
The Moon in the heavens goes through phases and cycles – sometimes it is full and open and at other times it is closed and hidden. Similarly, the house position of the Moon indicates where we are likely to encounter fluctuating circumstances, where we ‘go through phases’ depending on our changing moods – sometimes open and vulnerable, and at other times closed and withdrawn. We may exhibit regressive, childish and insecure behaviour in that area. More positively, it is where we keep in touch with the emotional and instinctive side of life, and where useful inclinations and memories which support existence are exhibited. Women may play an important role in our lives through the house placement of the Moon, a basic feminine oranimaprinciple.
The house with the sign of Cancer on the cusp (or contained within it) carries a similar influence to the Moon in a house. Also, the house with Cancer in it will in some way be connected to the house in which the Moon is placed. For instance, the philosopher Bertrand Russell was born with Cancer on the cusp of the 9th house and the Moon in Libra in the 11th. His philosophy and world view (9th) strongly sympathized with and supported (the Moon) the cause of humanitarianism and freedom of thought (11th house).
Moon in the 1st
Any planet in the 1st house is amplified as if the volume has been raised on that principle. According to its sign placement, the Moon there energizes the emotional, instinctive and feeling responses of the individual. Unless strongly modified by other aspects in the chart, the person will radiate lunar qualities – sensitivity, receptivity and a kind of child-like openness to which others are naturally drawn.
While the Sun in the 1st wants to exert a dynamic impact on the environment, the Moon in the 1st is more inclined to stay fused with mother and surroundings. All little babies instinctively know that winning the love of the caretaker helps to ensure survival and therefore they adapt to what the mother likes or wants. But those with the Moon in the 1st – even later in life when survival is not dependent on the presence of another person – may habitually act as if their lives depended on being what others want them to be. Consequently, they exhibit a radar-like ability to pick up and read signals emanating from those around them. However, the interpretation of these signals is often distorted by a high degree of subjectivity. They can be so swaddled in their own needs, feelings and emotional complexes that they are sometimes incapable of viewing life or others at all objectively. In extreme cases, all they care about is what they want and can’t easily give another person anything unless it fits in with that.
Nonetheless, the Moon in the 1st bestows an almost animal-like intelligence – instinctively knowing what to do in certain situations. They can ‘sniff out’ opportunity, ‘feel’ danger, or ‘hear’ trouble.
The house with Cancer on the cusp or contained within it will be connected in some way to a 1st house Moon. For instance, Derek Jacobi, whose subtle and sensitive character portrayals have made him one of the most respected of English actors, was born with the receptive and naturally creative Moon in Libra in the 1st and Cancer intercepted in the 10th house of career.
Moon in the 2nd
Whereas the Sun in the 2nd enhances its sense of identity and power through money and possessions, the Moon in the 2nd is content with the emotional security these things bring. The Sun must find its own value system, but those with the Moon here might swallow whole the value system of the family of origin or those around them. The Sun projects prestige onto possessions; the Moon projects feelings onto what it owns. There can be a sentimental attachment to objects, especially those inherited from the family or linked with the memory of key people or situations in the life. Often there is an interest in heirlooms and antiques – anything from the past.
Like the changing Moon in the heavens, financial circumstances might fluctuate. Money can be earned through professions related to the Moon such as those which serve public needs, careers in catering, pub or hotel work, child-care, housing and real estate, or even work at sea. This position suggests inner resources of adaptability, sensitivity and the ability to instinctively know what others want or need.
Moon in the 3rd
While the Sun in the 3rd bursts in on the scene and wants to create an impression on the immediate environment, the Moon in this house reflects and is shaped by the surroundings. As there is the ability to ‘feel’ what others are thinking, those with this placement may have some difficulty in distinguishing between their own thoughts and the ruminations of others around them. At times, they may believe that they are being objective and rational when in actual fact they are reacting on the basis of some emotional complex. Situations will be coloured according to their moods and sensitivities. If they are in a positive frame of mind, then they will interpret everything positively. If they feel touchy and vulnerable, the same environment will be interpreted quite differently.
The mind is imaginative and there is usually a retentive memory. The Sun in the 3rd believes that knowledge is power; the Moon in the 3rd craves knowledge for the security it brings to truly know how something works. Since the Moon is associated with influences from the past, there may be a fascination for such subjects of study as archaeology, genealogy and history. This placement gives a certain adaptability to changing environments, but the mind may wander or fluctuate from one interest to another. The relationship to siblings – especially female relatives such as sisters, aunts or girl cousins – is worth examining for clues to the psychological make-up of those with this placement. Comfort and security is sought through a sibling or a relative, or they may have had to be ‘mother’ to others around them during the growing-up years. The actual mother may be related to more like an older sister than a parent.
The research of the Gauquelins suggests that this placement confers some degree of writing talent. Unless the Moon were in an air sign, the writing would likely display heartfelt emotion or describe personal memories and experiences. Public speakers with the Moon in the 3rd should be able to sway the feelings of the audience. Teachers with this placement can relate to the deeper feelings and needs of their students.
Moon in the 4th (and Cancer on the IC)
Whereas the Sun in the 4th struggles to free itself from too great an identification with the family, the Moon in the 4th finds security and a sense of belonging within this structure. Refuge from life’s battles is sought by withdrawing back into the home. Even when they have a family of their own, those with this placement may pack their bags and run back to the family of origin when difficulties arise. They need the home to be a kind of retreat and sanctuary, and therefore they are highly attuned to the undercurrents and changes of atmosphere in that environment. Nonetheless, they may not always make their own feelings obvious to others. Often they regress into their early childhood behaviour patterns when the struggles of life become too much. I know one person with this placement who whenever he is upset has an intense craving for chocolate chip cookies because that is what his mother gave him to make him feel better as a child. It is as if there is a mechanism in the psyche which says ‘All right, I’ve had enough growing up for now, I’m going backwards for a while.’
A child normally looks to its mother for security and containment but with the Moon in the 4th it is possible that the father emanated a safer feeling than the mother. Some with this placement may still be searching for a father to make life secure for them. In the long run, the parent needs to be found on an archetypal level from within the self. Depending on the aspects to the Moon in this house, qualities of caring and nurturance might have been learned from the father rather than the mother.
Sometimes the 4th house Moon wanders restlessly in search of the home or even the country in which it feels the most safe or has the greatest sense of belonging. Sometimes it is the conditions within the home itself which fluctuate. Often there is an interest in family lineage, real estate or archaeology and perhaps a strong desire to live by water. The conditions surrounding the end of life may be shown by the aspects to the Moon in this house.
With Cancer on the IC, a deep and persistent longing for peace, safety and tranquillity is the foundation on which the life is built.

Moon in the 5th
The Sun in the 5th stresses and strengthens its individuality through tackling hobbies, romance and creative pursuits; those with the Moon in this house, however, engage in such outlets in the search for comfort, security and relaxation. While 5th house Suns struggle to be creative, 5th house Moons feel most ‘at home’ when creating. Often artistic expression is innate and natural. An inborn sense of importance and specialness allows them to enjoy themselves – they don’t have to prove anything. Of course, aspects to the Moon must be examined in this respect to see with what degree of difficulty or ease this principle is operating.
Unless the Moon is difficultly aspected by Saturn or the outer planets, there is normally a desire to produce children. We meet the mother in whatever house the Moon is in. In this case, patterns established with the mother during the growing-up years may be re-enacted through their own children. For instance, if they felt that mother didn’t like them when they were small, they may then fear that their children won’t like them or they may be afraid that they won’t like their children. The Moon in any house evokes old memories and associations. Similarly, issues around the mother could be relived through romantic entanglements.
Very often, those with 5th house Moons have a great appeal to the public in general. Their way of presenting themselves is pleasing, engaging and usually non-threatening to most people, as if there is something vaguely familiar about them. Sir Laurence Olivier, known for his ability to portray so impeccably such a wide range of characters, was born with the inherently discerning and skilful Moon in Virgo in the 5th.
Moon in the 6th
Those with this placement find security and comfort attending to daily routine and administering to the needs of the body. Daily rituals like making the morning coffee, taking tea at four, and the bath last thing at night give them a feeling of continuity and well-being.
Physical health and their ability to function and cope with everyday contingencies will vary according to moods. Aspects to the Moon in this house reveal how successfully a person can contain the kinds of anxieties that crop up from day to day. A trine from Saturn could indicate, for instance, that the physical vessel is a hardy container, remaining steadfast in situations to which others might overreact. A square to Mars, though, suggests that the person ‘acts out’ every little anxiety – the body just cannot contain or support the stress that quietly. There may be a connection between how the mother coped with daily tensions and the way in which this person does the same. Those kinds of illnesses which can be inherited or which ‘run in the family’ should be noted and preventative measures are worth taking. They should be careful about diet – eating problems or overindulgence in alcohol could arise at the onset of emotional difficulties. The body has an instinctual wisdom of its own which they can learn to respect and recognize without too much effort. If they take the time to notice what their bodies register when they walk into a room or meet someone for the first time, they will realize just how much can be intuited through bodily sensations.
There is a need to feel emotionally engaged in work. Usually a job which involves interaction with other people is better than working in too isolated a situation. Sometimes they find themselves entangled in the personal life of co-workers or servants. Those with the Moon in the 6th are adept at fulfilling the practical andemotional needs of others and are well suited to any employment in which they can play ‘Mother’. Unresolved mother issues may be projected onto the dog or cat. More seriously, a pet to love and care for and who is there when they come home could contribute to both psychological and physical health.
Moon in the 7th
Those with the Moon in the 7th may be over-sensitive or over-adaptive to the needs of the partner, deriving their identity too much from what the other person wants them to be.
Conversely, they may be looking for a mother in a mate. Early emotional patterning around the mother might be projected onto the partner, clouding an objective perception of the here-and-now reality. A host of problems arise if a partner (male or female) is confused with the mother in this way – not to mention the fact that even the thought of sex with the mother is taboo. Marriage may be sought for the security it offers and the promise of a cosy home and family which provide the person with a sense of belonging. The Moon is not that concerned about being a separate individual. Getting married is what most people do – so why shouldn’t they follow suit? Hard aspects to the Moon from Saturn or the outer planets may render the fulfilment of these basic desires more difficult: while the Moon in the 7th is definitely inclined towards relationship, other parts of the self may not be so co-operative.
The partnership itself may need the kind of nurturing and caring that a small baby would be given. The fluctuating nature of the Moon could manifest in a number of ways. Those with this placement might experience many moods and changes of feelings in connection to the relationship. In some cases, the Moon in the 7th describes a restless, unstable or emotionally idiosyncratic partner. As with any planet in the 7th, the person is advised to reflect on why he or she has attracted those particular qualities in another person. What is the other person ‘living out’ for them?
Moon in the 8th
This position gives an innate openness and attunement to hidden forces operating personally or collectively, which might express itself as the ability to sense evolving social currents, especially subtle economic or business trends. However, those with the Moon here could, at times, be confused or ‘taken over’ by powerful unconscious complexes which grip and overwhelm them. As children, they would have been extremely sensitive to undercurrents in the home environment, especially the mother’s deeper feelings, moods and frustrations, which they may still be ‘carrying around’ inside them. Present relationships will reawaken earlier emotional patterns and there is the need to delve into the past to uncover the roots of these problems.
Early experience with sex or death may have strongly affected the character. Sex or intimacy could be sought primarily for emotional security or as a way of forgetting the struggles of the world. This placement is usually very responsive to the sexual or emotional needs of the partner and will probably not find it difficult to adapt to these. Very often, there is a natural capacity to help others discover a greater sense of their value and worth. They may literally ‘care for’ other people’s money, or nurture others through times of trauma and transition.
If the Moon is difficultly aspected, divorces, endings or separations may be messy and fraught with more than the usual degree of anxiety, although hitherto untapped resources and strengths could be discovered through such breakdowns and crises.
On a more mundane level, there is the possibility of inheritance of land or property, most likely through the mother or the partner.
Moon in the 9th
The Moon in the 9th often exhibits an uncanny ability to foretell the outcome towards which events are leading. There is a natural receptivity to the realm of philosophy and religion and an intuitive grasp of concepts and symbols. The feelings give access to what the mind cannot rationally comprehend. Although those with this placement may rely on a faith which has been inherited via the family or culture, they have the ability to adapt the philosophy to changing influences and conditions.
Ninth house Moons may reside in a foreign country for periods in the life. Travel is connected to the emotional life – some people yearn for their spiritual home or feel a special link to a particular culture other than their own. Travel, adventure, fanciful dreaming or philosophical pursuits could be used as a means of escaping from stressful situations or the struggles of everyday life. They may feel most ‘at home’ when contemplating the meaning of life, praying in church, or when they are about to board an aeroplane or embark on a new venture or enterprise.
Their way of caring for others may be through sharing philosophical or spiritual insights, or inspiring potential disciples with new hope, vision, meaning and direction. The image of God may have a matriarchal slant, although this will be strongly coloured by the Moon’s sign and aspects.
In men’s charts, there can be close relationships with foreign women, or women who somehow broaden or expand their horizons. Difficult aspects to the Moon in the 9th could indicate problems with female in-laws. The Gauquelins found a correlation between the Moon in the 9th (just after culminating) and writing as a profession.
Moon in the 10th (and Cancer on the MC)
As children, our well-being depends on our mother loving us. Those with the Moon in the 10th project the ‘mother’ onto the world: their safety and security needs are linked to issues of profession and status. They are extremely sensitive about their reputations, standing before the public, and what people think about them in general. No matter how mature and self-sufficient they appear, inside is a little boy or girl looking up to the mother/world and asking to be loved. Squares and oppositions to the Moon in the 10th denote other parts of the person which frustrate or do not necessarily gel with what winning that approval requires. One gruelling example of this is Richard Speck, born with the Moon in Cancer in the 10th but with Mars in Aries squared to it, who murdered eight nurses in June 1966 when transiting Jupiter was conjuncting the Moon and bringing out the Mars square.
The person with the Moon in the 10th often exhibits, through gestures and movements, a close identification with the mother. As children, they are exceptionally responsive to her physical and emotional life. The acclaimed musician Van Cliburn first studied the piano at the age of three and was taught by his mother who had been a concert pianist herself: he had Cancer on the 10th house cusp and the Moon in Leo in the 10th. Later on, some people with this placement may even become like mothers to their own mothers. At some point, they need to sort out just where mother ends and they begin by defining their own space and physical reality.
The career or profession may reflect mothering qualities: serving and catering to other people’s needs, feeding them, housing them, nursing them, etc. Career issues will elicit and expose their feelings and emotions. Bosses or authority figures may be the target for unresolved problems with the mother or parents in general.
Some may look to the world to mother them via the welfare state. There will be a sensitivity to the moods of the public and a potential to sway the feelings of the masses.
Cancer on the Midheaven or in the 10th house carries a similar connotation to the Moon there.
Moon in the 11th
Those with the Moon in the 11th seek security, comfort and a sense of belonging through friends, groups and organizations. They could be very impressionable and should exercise some discrimination in the choice of people or circles with whom they associate. Unless the Moon is strongly fixed, they have the capacity to blend in with many different crowds.
They may like to ‘mother’ friends and likewise expect a fair degree of support and nurturing from others when needed. Some may keep friends from as far back as childhood. If the Moon is in a mutable sign there may be many changing acquaintances and fewer lasting friendships. Early hurts or disappointments with friends are worth exploring if the Moon is difficultly aspected as problems may have established patterns which need to be examined and cleared. Women with hard aspects to the Moon in the 11th often complain about trouble getting along with other women. It is possible that ‘unfinished business’ with the mother could be projected onto female friends. For either sex, a well-aspected Moon here usually implies beneficial friendships with women. The mother may be experienced more as a friend than an actual mother.
Many people with the Moon in the 11th involve themselves in group activities and social outings as a way of relaxing and unwinding from the struggles in other areas of life. Others join groups which promote causes about which they feel very emotional. Some may play ‘mother’ in the group, making sure everyone else is comfortable or they may even open their own home as a meeting place. There is the potential to stir the feelings of large groups of people.
Goals and ambitions could fluctuate with moods, and are perhaps too easily influenced by other people’s opinions about what would be best for them.
Provided heated emotional issues don’t cause too many problems with others, this placement is an indication of those who could accumulate a ‘family of friends’ with whom they share ties as strong as those of blood.
Moon in the 12th
Like the Moon in the other water houses, this placement suggests an innate psychological openness and vulnerability. A thin line exists between what they are feeling and what others around them are feeling. Like psychic vacuum cleaners, they ‘suck in’ what is circulating in the atmosphere. They may believe they are experiencing their own emotions, when, in actual fact, they have absorbed those of someone else. Without forgoing their inborn receptivity, they would be wise to develop ways of strengthening their ego-boundaries in order to protect themselves from being too invaded. They need to master and use their sensitivity rather than be overwhelmed by it. Some may require periodic seclusion to re-establish their inner peace and equilibrium.
The root of emotional problems is deeply embedded in the unconscious and not easily accessible to the conscious memory. Psychological difficulties could stem from very early infancy or even pre-natal experiences. Reincarnationists would maintain that hard aspects to the Moon in the 12th suggest that present life problems are directly connected to unfinished emotional business from past lives. These could manifest in difficulties with the mother, children, and women in general, or may reveal themselves in the house with Cancer on the cusp or contained within it.
In any case, the Moon in the 12th often indicates a complex or unusual relationship with the mother. The 12th house knows no boundaries: the child would have been very receptive to the mother’s feeling life and would continue to be so even when physically separated. Through dreams, mediumship and visions, many people with 12th house Moons are still closely linked with mothers long departed from the world.
While those with this placement have vivid feelings and dreams, they may carefully conceal their emotions and exude an air of mystery. In certain cases, there are secret love affairs or emotional liaisons which are kept hidden for any number of reasons.
There is a natural capacity to care for those who are limited or afflicted in some way. As with the Sun in the 12th, some may be so overwhelmed by deep seated phobias and complexes that they have great difficulty in leading an ordinary day-to-day existence. In some cases, an institution may have to ‘mother’ them. Sometimes early experiences in hospitals or children’s homes would have affected the character significantly.
In general, the Moon in the 12th indicates a fairly prevalent desire to regress back into the bliss of a womb-like existence. Those who had difficult pre-natal experiences, or who were deprived of the mother at an early age, may need to heal these wounds before they can accept incarnation and say ‘yes’ to life.
More positively, the Moon in the 12th often indicates direct access to a storehouse of wisdom available to the individual at those times when insight and inner resources are most needed. Some will act as vessels to mediate mythic and archetypal images for others. William Blake, with the Moon in Cancer in the 12th, is a supreme example of this. He believed that the artist, not the priest, was our closest link with God. Blake elaborated on his role as mediator in his poem ‘Jerusalem’: ‘I rest not from my great task! To open the Eternal Worlds, to open the immortal Eyes of Man inwards into Worlds of Thought.’1The Gauquelins also found a correlation between 12th house Moons and successful careers in writing and politics.
Notes – Chapter 191. William Blake cited by Martin Butlin inWilliam Blake, Tate Gallery Publications, London, 1978, p. 17.
