The Twelve Houses

20.MERCURY, GEMINI AND VIRGO THROUGH THE HOUSES

Each planet has certain associations with the gods and goddesses of Greek and Roman mythology. The characteristic activities of the Greek Hermes and the Roman Mercury shed light on the function and meaning of this planet and the way it expresses itself through the different houses.
Mercury was the messenger of the gods – a fact-gatherer and distributor of information. Likewise, the planet Mercury in the chart is associated with the workings of the mind and intellect and with various forms of exchanging information, such as writing, speech, teaching and travel. The myth tells us that as soon as Mercury was born he was bored with just being safely tucked away in his cradle; in fact, he abandoned it as quickly as he could in order to find something more interesting to do. Similarly, Mercury’s house position in the birthchart indicates an area of life in which we are restless, curious and inquisitive. Like a growing child fascinated by all the different things in the world to touch, name and discover, we embark on a quest to figure out how life works. In myth, Mercury was always portrayed as young, and never as an old man. By house, this planet defines that sphere of life where we can stay eternally young, maintaining an open and fresh outlook.
Mercury was an arbitrator and maker of deals. He pleaded different cases for the various gods. One of his first actions after birth was to make offerings to all of the twelve great divinities of Olympus. He was also a notorious thief who stole a little something from all the other gods (such as Apollo’s cattle and Aphrodite’s girdle). In this sense he was also a kind of cosmic mimic able to partake of some of the qualities of each and every god. Likewise, Mercury, by house, shows where there is a high degree of adaptability and versatility on the one hand, and a changeability and fickleness on the other. Just when you think you have nailed him down, he slips away and turns up somewhere else with a different point of view. The mind itself, like the god Mercury, is a kind of trickster. The intellect enables us to be objective and analytical but very often it can trick us by twisting facts to suit any case we wish to justify. As someone once said, ‘There are lies, damned lies, and statistics.’
The medieval alchemists wrote of a figure they called Mercurius. He was defined both as ‘the world-creating spirit’ and ‘the spirit concealed or imprisoned in matter’.1Paradoxically, he was responsible for creating the world and yet he was trapped within his own creation. Many years later, a twentieth-century German scientist, Werner Heisenberg, researching into the field of atomic physics, disclosed his ‘Uncertainty Principle’ in which he showed that ‘the act of observation itself affects that which is being observed.2Somehow, our minds play a part in determining the world.
Mercury delivered messages from the gods to mortal humans. In this sense, he represents a process in all of us which allows a bridge to be built between higher understanding and everyday reality, between consciousness and unconsciousness, and between ego and environment. The mind can divide us from other people, but it is also through the mind that our consciousness can be expanded to a broader awareness of theinterconnectedness of all life. The mind canseveror it canunite, and the house position of Mercury shows where we can box ourselves into a cornerorreach out to touch and understand other people and our own selves better. It is worth reflecting on something the philosopher Epictetus said almost two thousand years ago: ‘We are not troubled by things, but by the opinions which we have of things.’3In Mercury’s house, we may not always be able to change the world but we can always do something about the way we are looking at it.
Mercury is associated with two signs, Gemini and Virgo, which represent two complementary functions of this planet. The Gemini side to Mercury is clever at piecing bits of information together and relating different aspects of life to one another; Virgo, on the other hand, dissects and pulls things apart, analysing each component in detail.
Gemini contained in a house elicits Mercury’s changeable, communicative and restless qualities. It is where we tend to be ‘on the go’ and often spread somewhat thinly. Like the proverbial butterfly, we may be hard to pin down in that area.
Virgo on the cusp or contained in a house evokes that side of Mercury which is precise, critical and attentive to detail. While Gemini likes to know a little bit about a host of different things, Virgo prefers to know a great deal about a few things. In Gemini’s house we pursue knowledge for knowledge’s sake, but in Virgo’s house we acquire knowledge in order to use it practically and constructively.
The house Mercury is in will be connected in some way to any house with Gemini in it, and also with any house where Virgo is found. For instance, the writer Oscar Wilde was born with Mercury in Scorpio in the 3rd house and Gemini on the cusp of the 10th, relating the house and planet of communication (Mercury in the 3rd) with profession and career (10th). But his 3rd house Mercury is also linked to his Ascendant, because Virgo is on the cusp of the 1st house. He met life (1st house) equipped with a razor- sharp intellect and a threateningly incisive wit (Mercury in Scorpio in the 3rd).
Mercury in the 1st
Those with this placement become conscious of themselves and life in general by being curious and asking questions. They are meant to be spokespeople – distributors of ideas and information or channels through which one discipline is linked to another. They are usually highly analytical, both of themselves and others.
Mercury is a mimic and will take on the qualities of the sign it is in and any planet it closely aspects. Therefore, these need to be carefully examined. For instance, Mercury in a fire sign or conjunct Mars in the 1st gives rise to impulsive speech, action and behaviour. Things pop out before they know it. Mercury in an earth sign or conjunct Saturn is more prone to cautious assessment prior to committing the self to activity. Things have to ‘sit’ right with them before they can act. Mercury in a water sign or aspected to Neptune will evaluate the perceptions through the feelings and emotions, unlike Mercury in air or aspected to Uranus which will speak and act from a more purely objective stance, having (often in a flash) computed the bigger picture.
Those with Mercury in the 1st imbue the world with significance on the basis of what theythinkabout it. If they don’t like what they see, rather than blaming the world ‘out there’, they should try changing their own attitudes and then take another look at what they find. This same important idea was clearly expressed by the deep and independent thinker Albert Schweitzer, who wrote: ‘The greatest discovery of any generation is that human beings can alter their lives by altering their attitudes of mind.’4
Those with Mercury in the 1st often maintain a youthful appearance throughout life. Sometimes there are frequent changes of environment in the early years, as if they are forced from a young age to view life from different angles.
Mercury in the 2nd
If well-aspected, Mercury in the 2nd can be a skilful manipulator of money or finance, especially adept at arbitration and making deals with others. Money can be earned through such professions as selling, writing, lecturing, teaching, secretarial work, the transport industry, etc. They may be concerned with the movement or distribution of goods, with devising new techniques of production, or with ways of improving the quality of existing products. Innate values to be developed include inventiveness, dexterity, flexibility and a talent for using words.
On a broader level, there is a curiosity and urge to understand the nature of the physical world. A small pebble found on the beach or the intricacies of a hair follicle found on the body are endlessly fascinating for a minute or two. A sense of security is found through knowledge and learning how something works. However, unless Mercury is in a fire sign, it may take some time before experience is fully transmuted into understanding when placed in the earthy 2nd house.
Gemini in the 2nd suggests more than one source of income or way of earning money. Cleverness and ingenuity are marketable assets. Sometimes the person may work with relatives.
Virgo on the 2nd emphasizes precision and attention to detail as inborn resources worth developing. Shrewd and cautious with money and possessions, they may place more importance on quality than on quantity. Some with this placement come to value the healthy functioning of the body as the most important possession in life.
Mercury in the 3rd
Mercury is strongly placed in the 3rd, since in the natural zodiac this is one of its own houses. The sign placement and aspects to it will describe the way a person thinks, learns and digests experience. A 3rd house Mercury in fire or air or in aspect to Mars, Jupiter or Uranus indicates a more extroverted and speedy mind than when Mercury is placed in an earth sign or in aspect to Saturn, which slows down and deepens the thought processes. Mercury in water or aspected to the Moon or Neptune learns more through osmosis, absorption and aesthetic and emotional appreciation than in an analytic, step-by-step mode. A ‘good mind’ is normally defined as one that can think rationally and logically, but an examination of the 3rd house may reveal other kinds of minds –just as good– which operate differently from the standards of traditional educational systems. Learning difficulties may be shown by aspects of Uranus, Neptune, or Pluto to a 3rd house Mercury and often stem from the fact that this person’s mind is not the type that is favoured by conventional teaching techniques.
In general, however, Mercury in the 3rd, unless adversely aspected, reveals a lively, witty, observant intellect, adept at communication and repartee, with good attention to detail. Those with this placement are unusually clever at selecting those facts which justify or support the case they wish to present. (Oscar Wilde, with Mercury in Scorpio in the 3rd once wrote, ‘Truth is rarely pure, and never simple.’) Those with Mercury in the 3rd normally have at least a little something to say about everything. If you don’t think so, ask them and wait a minute.
The nature of the relationship with siblings and neighbours will be shown by the aspects to Mercury in this house. Mercury in difficult aspect to Saturn or Pluto, for instance, could indicate some deep-rooted problems stemming from sibling issues. These are worth examining as they often illuminate patterns which may still be operating much later in life. I drew up the chart of a woman with Mercury conjunct Pluto in the 3rd house whose younger brother died when she was only six years old. At the age of twenty-eight, she was still walking around believing that something she had said or done was the cause of his death.
Gemini on the 3rd usually gives a quick and alert mental style. An innate ability to master languages is indicated. However, there may be a tendency to mouth opinions before all the facts are known, thus landing a foot in it.
Perhaps due to an anxious disposition, Virgo on the 3rd attempts to handle everyday affairs and interactions with efficiency and caution. Critical and analytical abilities are increased with an aptitude for selecting just the right word or phrase to precisely express a concept or sentiment.
Mercury in the 4th (and Gemini on the IC, and Virgo on the IC)
Mercury in the 4th sometimes indicates an intellectual or academic home background, where the emphasis was on being sensible and rational, perhaps at the expense of feelings, warmth and physical closeness. Intelligence may be inherited through the family line. If the 4th house is taken to mean the father, then in some way he would have carried the Mercury projection: he might have been experienced as expressive, articulate, critical or possibly tricky and elusive, someone who ‘comes and goes’. Mental attitudes could be mixed up with those of the father. There may even be more than one father – the actual father and a stepfather or another person who fills the role of a father-figure.
Early changes of residence may bring to the surface underlying qualities of flexibility and adaptability. Some with this placement might prefer a nomadic lifestyle. If Mercury is difficultly aspected in the 4th, there could be more than the usual amount of bickering, arguments and back-biting within the early home or later home environments. Mental and educational activities could be carried on in the home. Even well into the second half of life, the person would benefit from further learning or studying.
Gemini on the IC describes a curious and restless soul, often with a strong dual nature. Dane Rudhyar compares this placement to a palm or sequoia, which has many roots, though none reach very far below the surface.5The person could ‘lose the self’ in a web or maze of ideas, thoughts, or a mass of inconsequential, or contradictory, bits of information. More positively, there is a persistent urge to order and understand the self and the environment. The home may be used as a place where ideas are exchanged and neighbours congregate. Sometimes there are two homes, perhaps one in town and the other in the country.
Virgo on the IC indicates a highly self-critical nature. A desire to refine or improve the self is the foundation upon which much of the life is built. This is exteriorized into a preoccupation with improvements around the home, or the maintenance of an efficiently functioning household. Virgo on the 4th house cusp may use the home as a base of operation for work. Attention should be paid to health problems which run in the family.

Mercury in the 5th
Creative pursuits, hobbies and recreational outlets are the means of becoming more conscious of the self and the environment. Some form of artistic expression may be the medium through which this person sees, thinks, feels and communicates. The incomparable Mozart, the expressive symbolist poet Verlaine, and the learned Renaissance painter Raphael all had Mercury in this house. For those with this placement, experience is more richly understood and better digested if it can be described in poetic words, drawn, sung about or danced. Knowledge is passed down from generation to generation in this way.
Expanding the mind through knowledge and developing the ability to communicate and convey ideas contribute to greater self-fulfilment with Mercury in this position. Mental amusements such as chess, Scrabble and other games of strategy and wit might be typical 5th house Mercury pursuits. Gymnastics, track and field events, and those sports which involve precision teamwork such as basketball (Wilt Chamberlain of the Harlem Globetrotters was born with Mercury in Virgo in the 5th) also come to mind.
Mercury’s restlessness and need for variety can manifest itself in an active romantic life. (Virgo here will go for quality, but Gemini in the 5th, in the tradition of great French farces, may juggle a few at a time.) The flame of romance is probably kept burning longer if the other person is mentally stimulating. Flattering those with Mercury in the 5th about the acuity and breadth of their knowledge, or their brilliant way of putting things, will get you everywhere.
Parents with this placement normally foster the intellectual abilities of their children and both probably have a lot to learn from one another. The parent-child relationship may blossom when the child is older and increasingly able to communicate and exchange ideas. Mercury in the 5th makes a good teacher or educator of young people and I have often seen this placement in the charts of those who work especially well with adolescents.
Gemini on the cusp or contained in the 5th enhances writing, speaking, and mental and physical agility. Virgo there often indicates practical creative skills – carpentry, gourmet cooking, making their own clothes, pottery, etc.
Mercury in the 6th
Knowledge is acquired in the process of managing the affairs of everyday life and maintaining the health and well-being of the body.
With Mercury here, a great deal can be learned from the body – especially when little things go wrong. But those with this placement must learn to ask the right questions at the right time, such as, ‘Why do I always get this pain in the neck when you walk into the room?’ Or, ‘Why does my backache get worse on Saturday nights?’ In its own domain of the 6th, Mercury dispatches messages from the unconscious mind to the conscious mind via those minor aches and pains which most of us interpret as cues to reach for the aspirin. Information about the environment is also available through the barometer of the body if we only learn how to read the instrument. Carl Jung, who often used his intuition in this way while treating patients, had Mercury in the feeling sign of Cancer in the 6th sextile the equally receptive Moon in Taurus in the 3rd. The psychologist Arthur Janov promoted a form of treatment called Primal Therapy, in which patients were encouraged to discharge their deepest feelings and emotions through expressing these physically by crying, screaming, kicking, biting, etc.: he wasborn with Mercury in Virgo in the 6th ruling Virgo on the 6th house cusp and Gemini on the cusp of the 3rd house of communication.
Health problems may be connected to nerves, excessive worrying, too much activity and not enough rest. Yoga, relaxation techniques, meditation and attention to breathing can help reduce the stress of an overwrought mind and body. Mercury in the 6th is sometimes a case of mind (Mercury) over matter (the earthy 6th): positive mental images of the self affirm health, foster the healing process, and may even serve in the cause of prevention.
The 6th house describes how we make use of our time, and with Mercury here, the overriding need is to keep busy. Check priorities: how much of the time is frittered away in an endless number of pursuits and activities which in the end don’t really lead anywhere?
It is helpful if the work is mentally engaging and allows for some movement and mobility (especially if Gemini is on the 6th house cusp). Virgo in the 6th excels at those jobs which require precision and attention to detail and may perform daily routines with a ritualistic fanaticism (and even a fetishistic obsession for one particular brand of soap powder over another). If Mercury in the 6th is difficultly aspected, watch out for gossip, slander or back-biting among co-workers and a tendency for unresolved issues with siblings to resurface in the office.
Mercury in the 7th
Mercury’s dual function of gathering information and then distributing it again operates clearly when this planet is housed in the 7th: there is an enormous amount to learn through being with other people but there is just as much to teach and share with them. Mercury in the 7th naturally desires to communicate and exchange ideas with many different types of people. Assessing and understanding how and what others think is a favourite pastime. Telling them one’s own thoughts and opinions runs a close second.
Mercury in the 7th shops around for a partner who is intellectually stimulating. Of course, they may find so many people who are interesting in different ways, it is difficult to settle on just one. Then again, there may be no one ever interesting enough. Nor is Mercury in the 7th immune to the pitfalls of projection: some may try to import another person to do their thinking, talking and decision-making for them. Or they may attract someone who is non-committal, unreliable, or tricky to pin down. As hurtful as this might be, there is the secondary gain of having escaped being pinned down themselves.
While being careful not to approach the whole delicate and mysterious area of relationship too much ‘from the head’, some degree of objectivity and detachment is required to sustain a long-term involvement. With Mercury in the 7th, many problems can be ‘worked through’ if they are discussed and analysed. Some people with this placement may be fairly (or should I say unfairly) critical and judgemental about ‘those little things’ which their partners do that annoy them. Fortunately, the antics of the god Mercury remind us that a sense of humour about such things is the great balancer.
Gemini on the 7th sometimes indicates more than one important close relationship in the life – or one relationship which undergoes such a transformation that it is almost like an entirely new one. Virgo is more cautious and discerning about its choice of partners, although anyone who ‘needs saving’ or likes to save others is fair game.

Mercury in the 8th
The 8th house entices curious Mercury to explore and learn from what is hidden and less obvious in life – to ferret out secrets, and probe into mysteries in search of the bottom line. This is the detective-like mind, with eyes that can see in the dark. Bordering on a voyeuristic preoccupation, Mercury in the 8th watches the kinds of exchanges that go on between people – at the bank, the stock market, in the bedroom or behind any closed door. They may penetrate the world of money and finance, or turn their attention to psychology and the occult, with a fascination for the mysteries of sex and death. Although often adept at communicating and sharing with others anything which is obscure, subtle, deep or profound, they prefer to keep their own thoughts and motivations secret. For those with Mercury in the 8th, experience is not fast-food grabbed hastily between appointments, but something to be savoured and thoroughly digested.
Many astrological texts advise those with Mercury in this house (especially if difficultly aspected to Neptune) to examine all contracts for possible misunderstandings before signing. What one person believes is being said or promised may be different from how the other person reads it. The same note of caution applies to wills and inheritances – problems with Mercury in the 8th sometimes manifest as entanglements with relatives over such things. Any difficulties stemming from childhood or adolescent sexual explorations with brothers, sisters or neighbours are worth considering, as well as early encounters with the death of anyone close to them. Their own death could be related to diseases of the respiratory or nervous system, so attention should be paid to these areas.
With Mercury, Gemini or Virgo in this house, the mind is suited to investigative exploits and research work. Those with such a placement can be cool and detached about subjects which often arouse other people’s passions and fears. For Virgo, the sex drive may be targeted into some quite specific area of focus, while Gemini is curious (and perhaps opinionated) about almost everything in this respect.
Mercury in the 9th
When Mercury wanders into the 9th, he takes his wings along with him, for this is an expansive territory to cover. An 8th house Mercury burrows deep down and peers closely into things; in the 9th, Mercury gains his perceptions and awareness by ‘zooming up’ or standing back and looking at it all from a distance and a higher perspective. Believing that life and the cosmos can be ‘figured out’ intellectually, those with Mercury in this house attempt (or should attempt) to discover and understand the laws and principles which govern existence by scrutinizing the larger patterns at work. A natural urge to expand and broaden the mind through study, reading and travel keeps those with this placement as busy as ever in this domain.
Usually, there is a desire to teach and share what they perceive and discover, and to inspire others with what has inspired them. This placement suits philosophers, clergymen, writers, publishers, educators and public relations people.
Adhering too fanatically to their own beliefs or version of the truth is the danger of a difficultly aspected Mercury in this house. Facts which support the cherished belief system are readily received, but the others are handily overlooked.
In some cases, relatives who live abroad may figure in the life or a long journey might significantly influence how the person thinks. Problems with Mercury in the 9th can also mean bickering and gossip among in-laws.
Gemini on the 9th may have to explore many different philosophies and cultures in order to satisfy a thirst for knowledge and experience. Virgo here inclines the person to explore particular philosophies and cultures more in depth. With Virgo, the letter of the law may be taken too literally in an attempt to live the daily life in accordance with a rigid interpretation of the scriptures. Virgo believes in that which can be seen and tested and may have trouble card-cataloguing the inexplicable mysteries of life.
Mercury in the 10th (and Gemini on the MC, and Virgo on the MC)
The qualities and principles associated with Mercury are usually reflected in the choice of career when it is in the 10th house. The work may involve writing, teaching, printing, lecturing, selling, the media, telecommunications, administrative or secretarial skills, forms of manual dexterity, and the transport of goods or people from one place to another. While pursuing career and professional ambitions, they can learn about themselves and the environment. Those with this placement like to be seen as bright, intelligent and capable, and will want to be remembered by others for these qualities.
If the 10th is taken to mean the mother, then Mercury will colour the image of her. If she was seen as clever and articulate, then the child emulates those traits and tries to develop them. The mother might have emphasized the importance of a good education and the need to be intelligent and expressive in life. She also could have been experienced as fickle and changeable – not always present – as if her body was there but her mind was somewhere else. I have seen difficult aspects to Mercury in the 10th in the charts of some people whose mothers were mentally unstable. If besieged by hard aspects, this placement could also indicate communication problems between parent and child and a difficulty in understanding or appreciating one another.
Gemini on the cusp of the 10th may indicate more than one important career in the life. The work may be linked with siblings or other relatives. Sometimes there may be two people who have shared the mother’s role. Virgo on the 10th emphasizes a pride in the impeccability or exactness of one’s work. In this case, the mother may have been experienced as hardworking, critical and orderly, depending on the aspects to Mercury.
Mercury in the 11th
Awareness of the self and life in general is expanded through friendships and group contacts if Mercury is in the 11th. Rather than just pursuing something alone, Mercury here enhances its knowledge by seeking other people who share a similar interest. For instance, you can study astrology on your own at home with some books, or you can gather together with other people interested in it. Through doing so, other people’s attitudes, points of view and experiences of the topic enlarge your own scope and appreciation. Helpful hints can be shared and your own opinions aired: ‘Oh yes, I hadn’t seen that before, but did you ever consider …’ Problems with Mercury in this house could indicate trouble communicating or being understood in groups.
Mercury in the 11th also joins organizations which promote a common belief, concept or cause. One voice becomes many: a group of people thinking something is more powerful than just one person thinking the same thing. Mercury’s thoughts might dwell on the ways in which society can be improved or advanced. Mercury in the 11th feels a kinship with like minds or with other group members and sometimes acts as the group spokesperson. Then again, they may be the one that everyone else tells to shut up so that other people can get a word in. The nature of the group itself may be ‘mercurial’ –debating clubs, writing societies, or networking groups which link or refer one person or group to another.
Much of the same applies to friendship. If Mercury is projected onto companions, then those with the placement may seek a friend to do their thinking and decision-making for them. Or a friend may turn out to be unreliable, gossiping, or the type who says one thing and then does another. An actual brother or sister may be their best friend, or a friend is sought who can be like a brother or sister to them.
The 11th house is the house of goals and objectives and Gemini on the cusp may have some difficulty in choosing one particular goal or aim on which to focus. Dithering, what they think they want one day is not what they think they want the next. In groups, Gemini makes friends easily and usually has a great deal to say. Virgo in this house is more discriminating about its choice of groups or friends, but once having chosen probably finds it easier to make a longer commitment. Goals and objectives are achieved in a more logical step-by-step fashion than Gemini in this sphere. Virgo offers practical services to friends or organizations with which they associate.
Mercury in the 12th
Mercury doesn’t exactly wander into the 12th house – he falls into it. And, like Alice, he finds himself in a strange land, encountering things that are awesome, helpful and fascinating.
Primarily, a 12th house Mercury attempts to build a bridge between the conscious and unconscious minds – to integrate into conscious awareness what is operating in the hidden depths of the psyche. This involves a twofold process. First, those with this placement must venture into the imaginal realms of the unconscious, although if they don’t choose to take that initial step, it doesn’t matter – what is down there will sooner or later come up to get them. Secondly, once in that realm, they must look around, take notes and then come back up again. If they get stuck down there, forgetting to return up again or unable to do so, then someone else will have to be called in to rescue them.
What does this all mean? Those with Mercury here – through introspection, soul-searching, psychotherapy, good literature, or dreamwork – need to explore the unconscious to find out what makes them tick. Depending on the aspects to Mercury, some of what is stored there will be useful and productive and well worth bringing to the surface. However, other stuff may need to be sifted through and sorted out – especially learned impressions and memories from the past which, consciously remembered or not, distort and obscure how information received in the present is being interpreted. In order to see what is in front of them more clearly, they will have to clean up some of the early life (or previous life?) debris cluttering their immediate perception and awareness.
After a while uncollected rubbish starts to stink. If they don’t take some of that ‘garbage’ and convert it to compost, then the dissolving action that the 12th house has on any planet in it begins to take effect: in this case the mind (Mercury) breaks down. I mentioned that if Mercury doesn’t go down there, what’s down there comes up and gets them. Mercury in the 12th could suffer occasionally from intrusive thoughts of an obsessive or disturbing nature. If difficultly aspected, paranoia and the fear that others are talking or plotting against them could result. Innocent facts and people will be distorted to give support to these fantasies.
Planets in the 12th house are not sure of their boundaries. The question for Mercury there is, ‘whose mind is it anyway?’ An openness to thoughts and undercurrents in the atmosphere makes it difficult to know what thoughts are their own and which belong to other people, In fact, some people with Mercury in the 12th may be so afraid of ‘losing their mind’ that they compensate by being super-rational, only believing in what can be statistically proven or tested. This placement also gives a secretive mind, which hides what it is thinking from others. However, if Mercury is not too badly aspected, there are psychic abilities, a vivid imagination and access to the accumulated wisdom of the past.
The imaginative Pulitzer Prize-winning author Ernest Hemingway was born with Mercury in Leo in the 12th ruling Virgo on the Ascendant and Gemini on the cusp of the 10th, the house of career. The film-maker and actor Orson Welles was another brilliant talent with an expansive imagination: he was born with Mercury in Taurus in the 12th exactly sextile Jupiter in Pisces in the 10th. The often divinely inspired actor, Lord Olivier, also had Mercury in the 12th, ruling a Gemini Ascendant and Virgo on the cusp of the 5th house of creative self-expression.
I have met some people with Mercury in the 12th who are insecure about their mental abilities. It may be that they understand much more than they are able to put into words, or suffer from learning or educational difficulties. Conversely, those with Mercury here are sometimes involved in helping others who have problems with speech, reading, hearing or mobility. Whatever is in the 12th house is not just there for our own consumption – we can often use these energies to help or serve other people. There may be sacrifices that have to be made for brothers or sisters, or something unusual about the relationship with them.
The 12th house has been referred to as ‘the house of self-sustainment or self-undoing’. With Mercury here, negative thinking could be the root of many problems, while learning to use the mind and imagination more positively may be just the needed ingredient to transform obstacles into blessings.
Gemini on the cusp of the 12th warns that clear thinking could be obscured by unconscious emotional complexes which should be examined. On the positive side, they can usually talk themselves out of difficulties or like Odysseus manoeuvre cleverly through tricky situations. Virgo on the cusp of the 12th is prone to obsessive-compulsive thoughts. Stemming from a fear of looking silly or appearing foolish, they may be afraid to relax and let go. Often they judge themselves against too rigid ideals of perfection and harbour feelings of inadequacy. This sensitivity to what is weak or flawed can be turned around and used to help themselves or others where it is needed most.
Notes – Chapter 201. Sallie Nichols,Jung and the Tarot, Samuel Weiser, Maine, USA, 1980, p. 52.2. Russell, p. 125.3. Epictetus cited in Ferrucci, p. 105.4. Schweitzer cited in Ferrucci, p. 105.5. Rudhyar,The Astrological Houses, p. 164.
