The Twelve Houses

21.VENUS, TAURUS AND LIBRA THROUGH THE HOUSES

The planet Venus, associated with the Roman goddess of love and beauty with the same name, and with the Greek goddess Aphrodite, symbolizes the desire in all of us for union and relationship. Like the Moon, she is, in Jungian terms, ananimaprinciple representing the urge to balance, harmonize, merge and cherish. By house, Venus indicates a sphere of experience through which we can most naturally attain a sense of peace, equilibrium, well-being and satisfaction. Our ability to appreciate, to value, to love and be loved is stimulated in her domain. It is where we are pleasing and open to being pleased and where we exhibit some of our best style, taste and consideration for others.
Sounds nice – but before you rush to look where Venus is placed in your chart, keep in mind that this goddess had other sides to her nature which were less pleasant. First of all, she couldn’t bear it if life or other people didn’t measure up to her idea of what they should be. Because of such high expectations of perfection and harmony, the house of Venus may denote where we suffer some disappointment and disillusionment when life fails to meet these ideals. However, motivated by such dissatisfaction, Venus could also indicate the area of life in which we feel impelled to do something which will make the world (or ourselves) slightly more just, fair or beautiful.
Secondly, Aphrodite hated competition. She subjected the beautiful young mortal Psyche to extremely humbling lessons because she felt that Psyche had overstepped her place in receiving a degree of attention which only befitted a goddess, i.e. Aphrodite herself. Also, when Paris had to judge whether Aphrodite, Athene or Hera was the most beautiful goddess, Aphrodite unabashedly stripped off to bias his opinion. By house, Venus may show the area of life in which we feel rivalry or envy towards those who might be better endowed than ourselves. It is also where we will use seduction, sweet deceit and other such wiles to secure our aims. Reputedly, Aphrodite wore a magic girdle which had the power to enchant and enslave men.
As a further bribe to influence Paris to select her rather than the other goddesses, she offered him the ravishing Helen as his wife. It didn’t seem to matter to Aphrodite that Helen happened to be married already: winning the beauty contest was more important. As a result, the Trojan War was started, bringing misery and upheaval to the lives of thousands. Aphrodite (Venus), the goddess of love and beauty, sometimes makes a mess of people’s lives.
Finally, Aphrodite occasionally functioned as a kind of redresser of imbalance. For instance, by encouraging her son Eros to pluck Pluto with one of his famous arrows, she gravely disrupted the life of young Persephone, whom she felt was just too innocent and virginal for her own good. At times, in the house of Venus, a certain degree of pain, strife or suffering is needed to bring us into better harmony or balance if we have swung too far in any one direction.
Venus rules two signs, Taurus and Libra. Taurus represents the earthier and more sensual side of Venus. The house with Taurus in it is where we most directly seek tosatisfy desires of a physical or instinctual nature – appetite indulgences like food or sex and basic needs for comfort and security. Libra’s house, however, is where we want to fulfil romantic and aesthetic ideals of love, fairness, symmetry and proportion in a quest for the good, the beautiful and the truth in life.
The house Venus is in will influence any house with Libra or Taurus on the cusp or contained within it.
Venus in the 1st
If we understand the 1st house to describe the way in which we best realize our own special and unique identity, then Venus here suggests that life should be met with open arms. A natural urge to relate to others with sensitivity, refinement and goodwill is indicated. Although they find themselves by being harmonious and accommodating, there is a danger that in attempting to be all things to all people, they actually lose themselves. Venus in the 1st suggests that we should love and respectour own selvesas well.
In fact, a feeling of self-worth and self-esteem is crucial to loving and seeing other people more clearly. If we appreciate our own worth, then we can appreciate the worth of other people. If we accept ourselves, then we can more easily accept others. If those with Venus in this house don’t learn to love and accept themselves first, they may manipulate other people to do so in order to fill the gap. Like the proverbial coquette, they are out to get as much flattery and attention as possible to prove their value and worth. Some people with Venus in the 1st never take Aphrodite’s girdle off: they display an obvious seductiveness which can be used for their own benefit. They may even be downright treacherous.
Venus in the 1st often exhibits physical beauty or a ‘certain something’ which draws others to them. They may literally embody the best qualities of the sign in which the 1st house Venus is placed. Even without traditional good looks, an appreciative and admiring disposition will make them attractive and appealing.
In the 1st house, we need to make our presence known. Venus’ sweet dalliance can be very charming but taken too far borders on laziness – someone who sits and waits for things to come to them. If well-aspected, this placement is an indication of a harmonious early upbringing which endows the person with a positive sense of self and optimistic outlook on life.
Venus in the 2nd
Obviously, Venus in this house has a love of money, not just for the security it brings but because it allows them to purchase all those things they find beautiful and worthwhile. A sense of well-being is attained by surrounding themselves with that which they consider stylish and tasteful. They have an eye for beauty in the physical and material world. Some may shun anything considered ugly or inharmonious, while a more finely developed 2nd house Venus has the insight to perceive beauty, reason and purpose in those things which others might scorn.
Their innate resources include a sense of fairness and diplomatic tact. They have a knack for attracting what they need or value, so money, unless extravagantly spent, should not be too great a problem. An income could be earned through ‘Venusian’ professions: artistic endeavours, modelling, the selling or marketing of beauty or beauty-products, the diplomatic service, etc.
Taurus in the 2nd is sometimes too possessive of people and objects. Usually there is a deep love of the natural world, physical comforts and the sensual side of life, as well as practicality in money matters. Libra in the 2nd values gentility, refinement and social niceties. The style and finesse with which an appetite is satisfied is more important than the quantity which is consumed. Libra on the 2nd has a greater concern for the fair and equitable distribution of money and possessions than Taurus there, who is worried about having enough for itself.
Venus in the 3rd
Those with this placement have the ability to communicate in an easy, fluent and non-threatening manner if Venus is not hampered by difficult aspects. They are sensitive to the needs of those around them although some may try a little too hard to speak only what they think will please others. People generally find it easy to communicate and ‘open up’ to someone with Venus in the 3rd, as if they sense the atmosphere of loving receptivity this placement bestows. There is usually a fondness and appreciation of brothers and sisters and benefits through them, although certain aspects to Venus (from Pluto for instance) suggest an intense sibling rivalry or incestuous urges. Unless Venus is difficultly aspected, the educational experience should be fairly enjoyable. There is often a love of words, knowledge and languages, or the capacity to express the self through some form of artistic medium. Weekend jaunts here and there are likely to give pleasure and these people normally fit easily into different situations and environments.
Taurus in the 3rd may slow down the thought processes but when something is learned it will sink in deeply and remain with them. It may be easier to digest experience through the senses – how something ‘feels’ or ‘touches’ them rather than what they actually think about it. Libra on the cusp or contained in the 3rd enhances the ability to be persuasive, influential, and yet tactful in dealing with the immediate environment. In the name of harmony and fairness, they will ‘weigh up’ what others say or do. Libra here can see beauty in something which another person might overlook.
Venus in the 4th (and Taurus on the IC, and Libra on the IC)
The 4th house indicates qualities deeply embedded within the person. Those with Venus there basically value and desire peace and harmony in their surroundings. They cannot easily live in an atmosphere of strife, tension or discord, and in the end will do all that they can to reconcile problems or smooth over differences. Satisfaction and fulfilment can be found in making a home and in such domestic pursuits as cooking, decorating and gardening. If not too badly aspected, Venus in the 4th suggests a comfortable situation in the later years of life.
Venus carries with it the image of the beloved and all that is beautiful. One possible interpretation of this planet in the 4th is that the father (or ‘hidden parent’) catches this projection – he is made into the beautiful one. The boy-child may feel some rivalry or jealousy. How can he ever be as good as Daddy, who has all the charm and grace, and Mummy as well? The little girl may fall in love with such an enchanting father, in which case the mother becomes the rival. Nonetheless, Venus in the 4th suggests a positive family inheritance, both psychological and material. Sometimes good taste runs in the family or there has been an artistic influence in the early upbringing. Often, there is an interest in exploring the genealogy or family tree.
With Taurus on the IC or in the 4th house, the need for security is the foundation upon which the life is built. A deep-seated, instinctive territorial nature expresses itself in a powerful urge to have a home of one’s own. Regardless of how flippant the rest of the chart might look, underneath there is a basic caution and conservatism. Those with this placement are unlikely to disrupt or change situations unless there is an organic sense of ‘rightness’ about doing so. Time is needed to fully assimilate events and experiences. Any opportunity to spend more time relaxing in nature and just watching the grass grow and feeling the soil under their feet strengthens and stabilizes them.
With Libra on the IC or in the 4th house, a person’s sense of balance and well-being hinges on a good home environment and fulfilling relationships. The atmosphere in the home can be one of sharing and creative exchange. There is a deep need to establish a clear set of values, ideals and standards upon which to base action in the world.
Venus in the 5th
With Venus in the 5th, there is a natural urge to express the self in a creative or artistic fashion. Even if a career in the arts is not pursued, some sort of creative outlet brings greater personal fulfilment and well-being. In times of stress, picking up a paintbrush or sitting down to write something may restore a sense of equilibrium and balance. The motto of those with Venus in the 5th might be ‘If it’s worth doing, it’s worth doing in style.’ Unless very difficultly aspected by the outer planets, the personal style and flair is usually of a type which most people will find pleasing and endearing. For example, the actor Richard Chamberlain and the singer Glen Campbell, who both claim a wide public appeal, have Venus in the 5th. The glamorous actress Ava Gardner, born with Venus in Scorpio in the 5th, literally got to act out (5th) her Scorpionic Venus. In a 1948 movie calledOne Touch of Venusshe played a statue of the goddess come to life, who brought love and havoc into the affairs of everyone she met.
Those with this placement are often ‘in love with love’ and romantic pursuits will be high on the list of priorities. Some will only feel alive if they are in the throes of a great romance with (of course) themost divinecreature on earth. Hobbies, recreational activities and trips to the theatre, cinema or art gallery help to ‘round out’ the personality. In short, they love to play.
If Venus is well-aspected, children are likely to be a source of pleasure and fulfilment. Parents with this placement will usually encourage any sign of their children’s budding creativity – especially if their own artistic promise was stifled when they were young. Taken to an extreme, the child may be shuffled off to dancing school on Monday, acting class on Wednesday and piano lessons on Friday – whether the poor kid wants to or not. Parents with Venus in the 5th need to be careful about unconsciously setting up situations of competition or rivalry between children or between themselves and their children in an attempt to find out just who is the fairest or most talented of them all.
Taurus on the 5th emphasizes the enjoyment of the sensual side of life, creative talents of a practical nature and hobbies like gardening and cooking. There may be some difficulty letting go of children or creations. Libra enhances the appreciation of the fine arts and the pursuit of all which is beautiful and aesthetic. Usually there is a good relationship with children and young people.
Venus in the 6th
By house, Venus indicates those things we care about, are attracted to and appreciate. The 6th house is concerned with the running of everyday affairs, issues of work andservice, and attending to the proper functioning of the body. Combining Venus with this house we come up with someone who actually enjoys vacuuming the sitting room, has a tendency to fall in love with co-workers, and derives great satisfaction from the daily rituals of mundane life. Even brushing the teeth can be done with style.
Frivolity aside, Venus in the 6th takes pleasure in developing and fine-tuning their talents, skills and abilities. It’s not good enough to just do a job, it must be done beautifully. I have done quite a few charts for people with Venus in the 6th who have careers in the field of health, beauty and fitness, and many others who put their artistic talent to practical use as designers and draughtsmen. One in particular was concerned with designing kitchen products which were both functional and beautiful. More generally, there is the desire for a harmonious work atmosphere and the capacity to bring good feelings into this area.
Normally, the person feels the importance of developing a good relationship with the body. If health problems arise, these could be due to over-indulgence or some imbalance in the diet or life in general that needs consideration.
While Venus in the 6th enjoys the more mundane and everyday tasks of life, some may become obsessive about things – such as not being able to make love if the ashtray is too full. They are usually able to apply themselves to work involving precision and detail. The image of the beloved (Venus) might be projected onto servants, co-workers, milkmen, telephone repairmen, dental hygienists, and even pets. (I did a chart for a woman with Venus in the 6th who took her poodle to the hairdresser every third Friday.)
Taurus on the 6th enhances the stamina and gives a practicality and determination in meeting everyday life. There is a natural enjoyment of the physical body and the diversity of the natural world. Libra on the 6th emphasizes the capacity to be tactful and diplomatic in dealing with colleagues. They may, however, antagonize others if they demand the same kind of perfection from fellow workers that they ask of themselves. Ill health might result if the work environment is too stressful.
Venus in the 7th
For those with Venus in the 7th, the image of the beloved and that which is beautiful ‘lands’ on close partners and the whole arena of partnership in general. They only feel alive, happy, satisfied or complete if they are involved in a relationship. They can most easily see their beauty and value when it is reflected back from someone else. In other words, Venus in the 7th hands Aphrodite’s girdle over to their partners to slip into: seeing the beloved as perfect and beautiful helps them to feel good about themselves.
As usual, there are both pluses and minuses. If we perceive someone in a very positive light, then we increase the likelihood of getting back what is best in that person. However, no partner can always live up to the expectations which Venus in the 7th might place on them. The other person is notallVenus: sometimes he or she will do something which isn’t that beautiful or graceful and then the 7th house Venus is disappointed or turns critical. The same applies to the relationship itself: it can’t always be all hearts and flowers and Venus in the 7th (especially if aspected by Saturn or Pluto) will have to learn to accept the hard work entailed as well.
The 7th house describes how we interact with society in general, and Venus there would be very at home in the opulent drawing rooms and salons of early twentieth-century Paris (Marcel Proust had Libra on the 7th house cusp). What we bring to othersis also shown by the 7th, and Venus offers gifts of art, beauty, diplomacy and fashion. This placement also promotes success in legal matters.
Taurus on the 7th emphasizes constancy, fidelity and devotion in relationship with a tendency to possessiveness and jealousy. Marriage may be sought for the security, financial gain or physical closeness it offers. Libra on the 7th has a very strong urge for relationship and the need to develop tact and make adjustments for it to work without going along too much with others just for the sake of being included. (Don’t forget, with Libra on the 7th, Aries is on the 1st.) The partner is more likely to be idealized or there may be an endless search not just for Mr or Miss Right, but for Mr or Miss Flawless.
Venus in the 8th
Venus in the 8th ‘cares about’ what happens between people, and wants to ensure that anything which is shared or exchanged is beautiful, appropriate, beneficial and valuable. It favours business partnerships and the accruing of money and possessions through marriage or inheritance.
In the bedroom, Aphrodite’s magic girdle transforms into a provocative corselet (possibly black leather if Venus is aspected to Pluto). Her seductive charms find no better mode of expression than in the intimate whispers and caresses of love. Venus in the 8th has a way of receiving and responding to others which relaxes them, making partners feel secure enough to loosen inhibitions and restraints. In this sense, those with Venus in Scorpio’s natural house, whether innocently or not, entice others to give to them. Hearts open, secrets are exposed, and bank accounts are put in their name.
There is also a love for that which is mysterious or esoteric and a desire to probe for anything hidden or subtle, as if what is found on that level will make them more complete. (Seance parlours are probably filled with people with Venus in the 8th contacting their dear and departed wherever they might be.)
Taurus on the cusp or contained in the 8th has a flair for handling money and making business deals. There are usually concrete financial gains through marriage. Sex could be used as a way of manipulating or entrapping others. Libra on the 8th draws beauty out of people. There is a natural urge to relate closely with others and to treasure and value what others have to give. Both Libra and Taurus in this house give a sixth sense in partnerships which enables those with these placements to use tact and timing advantageously.
Venus in the 9th
For many of us, sitting down to contemplate the meaning and purpose of existence results in a headache. But rather than just struggling endlessly with religious and philosophical issues, those with Venus in the 9th usually derive greater happiness, peace and well-being from their belief systems. Somehow it wouldn’t be right for a 9th house Venus to project anything too nasty onto God: in Venus’ eyes only that which is fair, just and equitable deserves to be worshipped. Whether their God manages to live up to these high expectations will be shown by the aspects to Venus and other placements in the 9th. (For instance, the brilliant, influentialandtormented German philosopher Nietzsche had Venus in the 9thbutLeo on the 9th house cusp and its ruler, the Sun, opposed to Pluto and squared by Saturn.)
There is usually a love of travel and adventure and the promise of beneficial and pleasurable experiences to be had through them. Possessing a natural appreciation andfascination for the diversity of life expressed in the customs of different cultures, they might fall in love with a country other than their own, emulating its taste and style. Some may even marry someone foreign or a person met on holiday or abroad. This is also a good placement for teachers and educators who will be able to communicate the love of their subject to their students. Venus in the 9th easily and graciously enthuses about those things which they find valuable. Writers and artists with this placement invariably share their philosophy of life through their creations. Among those born with Venus in the 9th are the adventure writer Jack London, the controversial author Norman Mailer, and the lyrically profound Thomas Mann.
On a lighter note, relationships with in-laws are usually favoured if Venus is well-aspected in the 9th. If we understand a planet in a house to indicate the way in which we should meet the affairs of that house, then Venus here suggests that in-laws can be handled with tact and diplomacy.
Taurus in the 9th probably seeks some practical justification for philosophical beliefs and needs a philosophy which works in the everyday life. Because of the discomforts often entailed in being away from the home base, there will have to be some good reason to travel. Libra on the 9th has a strong sense of justice and fairness and may require a philosophy which has love of others as its main premise or which envisions humanity living up to some rather high ideals. Those with Libra on the 9th might also be fatally attracted to anyone with a foreign accent.
Venus in the 10th (and Taurus on the MC, and Libra on the MC)
If we understand the 10th house to be how we wish to appear to others, then Venus here is not likely to go out of the house looking too dishevelled (or without her trusty girdle on). Those with this placement want to be seen for their beauty, taste, grace or style. Professions are sought which afford them the opportunity to look beautiful or exhibit these traits: the artistic field, the entertainment business, the diplomatic service, the fashion world, etc. Two examples of Venus in the 10th in the field of show business are Jack Nicholson, who has become a kind of middle-aged male sex symbol with a reputation for knowing how to enjoy himself; and Brooke Shields, the teenage star who portrayed the lead in an appropriately named Venusian vehiclePretty Baby. Regardless of the chosen career, Venus in the 10th needs and desires a harmonious working situation doing a job they value with people they like. Aspects to Venus may show other parts of the character which render fulfilling this aim more difficult.
Venus in the 10th suggests a warm, close tie with the mother, although certain difficulties may present themselves. If Venus is projected onto the mother, then she is experienced as the one with a monopoly on sexual power, taste and style. The little girl with this placement may feel inept or awkward next to such a mother, or turn her into a rival with whom she competes for attention. The boy-child may be as receptive to the mother’s sexuality as he is to her maternal qualities. Mother then carries the image of the beloved and other women will have to compete with her.
Taurus on the MC or in the 10th may like outward displays of status and power. They can be possessive of their position and authority, showing great determination in the pursuit of career once they get going. Of the charts I have seen with this sign on the MC, some work as landscape gardeners, architects, builders and along the lines of massage and therapeutic body-work.
Those with Libra in the 10th or on the MC often work best in partnerships or in joint efforts with other people. They have much to offer in any work situation, but may be too exacting in demanding that others equal their service, precision and dedication. This sign shows up on the MC in the charts of certain diplomats, lawyers and politicians which I have seen as well as those who work in the arts, beauty and fashion fields. Those with Libra in this house are usually sensitive to how others might help them further their own social and career ambitions.
Venus in the 11th
A planet’s house position instructs how the person can best approach life in that area. Those with Venus in the 11th, then, should encourage and develop a natural inclination to unite and co-operate with others in friendship and group situations.
They have the capacity to bring positive influences into any group they join and receive the same back in return, although aspects to Venus will show if other things get in the way of this happening. Usually there will be a fondness for social life and cultural outings. If Venus is difficultly aspected by Jupiter or Neptune, too much energy may be dissipated in social situations and greater discrimination is required.
The image of the beloved and that which is beautiful might be projected onto a friend or a group. Some people with Venus in the 11th only feel beautiful if they are seen with and accepted by the ‘right’ group or crowd. There may be an eye to personal social advancement through choosing groups or friends who are helpful in achieving their goals and objectives in life. Unlike Neptune, Venus doesn’t always put on her girdle for nothing back in return.
For others, however there is an interest in those groups or organizations which propose to better or improve life in some way. Venus in the 11th gives and expects quite a high standard of friendship or group involvement and may be disappointed if others don’t share or live up to these ideals. Sometimes, issues of rivalry and competitiveness may surface with friends or in group situations.
Taurus on the cusp of the 11th or contained in this house could cling too closely to friends and exhibit an overdependence which is suffocating to others. They tend to be loyal, and once given, their friendship lasts a long time. A sense of security is gained through their friends and any groups to which they might belong. Services offered are often of a practical nature.
Libra in the 11th loves to entertain and be entertained by others. They are drawn to friends with whom they share similar tastes and have an intellectual rapport. Unlike Taurus here, they are more careful to allow others the same degree of space they want for themselves. A friendship may turn into a romance or vice versa. Either Venus in the 11th or Libra there may fall in love with someone they meet in a group situation or who has been introduced to them by a friend.
Venus in the 12th
According to Greek myth, Aphrodite had a rather unusual beginning to her life. Saturn castrated his father Uranus and cast the dismembered phallus into the sea. The severed genitals floated on the waters and produced a white foam from which Aphrodite rose. At first it seems strange that the goddess of love and beauty is born as a result of such a ghastly and despicable conflict, but it is this side of Venus which is often evinced in the 12th. Sometimes it is through pain, wounding, suffering and loss that we grow more beautiful, tender, poised and loving.
Also rippling through the 12th house is the urge to transcend separateness and merge with something greater than the self. Venus in this house suggests a love of letting go, of abandoning the self to something numinous, unbounded and divine. (Plato once said that ‘Love is the pursuit of the whole.’) In the 12th, Venus thirsts for an undefinable and immeasurable kind of beauty, something which offers total fulfilment, or perhaps a remembrance of a bliss long past.
Trying to quench this thirst by looking for this kind of love and beauty with another person, those with Venus in the 12th yearn to give themselves to a lover as one would to a god or goddess. Besides being a lot to ask of anybody, something deep inside still nags that adoration of just one person is not enough. With Venus in the 12th, a love is needed that knows no boundaries. Roberto Assagioli, the founder of Psychosynthesis, once said something which might help Venus in the 12th out of her predicament: ‘If you appreciate everything, you remain free.’1In that case, if you lose a person or it is not opportune to have the thing you love, there is always something else you can enjoy. Perhaps this is the task of Venus in the natural house of Neptune and Pisces – to love everything.
Venus in the 12th also suggests the love of anything subtle, hidden, intangible or hard to grasp. Spend a rainy afternoon listening to Debussy (Venus in Leo in the 12th) and you will glimpse something of the nature of this placement. Some may literally fall in love with a person who isn’t free, and in true 12th house fashion the relationship may have to be kept hidden, lived within restrictions, or ultimately given up. (In the 12th, Venus loves to make sacrifices for love.) Venus in the 12th also denotes the love of what other people reject; the love of the downtrodden, the underdog, the criminal who really has a heart of gold, the person nobody else understands, etc.
On a more mundane level, Venus in this house favours associations with institutions. Some may work in art galleries or museums, while others administer to those less fortunate in hospitals. In two instances of Venus in the 12th I have seen, one worked as a drama therapist and the other as an art therapist helping people to recover after severe breakdowns. In another case, I did the chart of a woman with Venus in the 12th who said her three years recuperating in a mental home were some of the happiest in her life. Sometimes it is within the confines of prison walls that people discover a talent for painting, writing or sculpting. Venus in the 12th can also work behind-the-scenes designing sets or costumes, or putting on the star’s make-up.
Any energy in the 12th house hangs in the balance – how we use that principle may determine what degree of joy or pain we meet in life. If Taurus is on the cusp of the 12th, being too materialistic or stubborn can cause problems, but not enough practicality or down-to-earth common sense could also be the tragic flaw. Libra on the 12th suggests that over-sensitivity to other people might give trouble, but not taking others’ needs or points of view enough into consideration is also a danger. If a 12th house Taurus can learn to hold fast when necessary but let go when appropriate, an important lesson in life will be learned. Similarly, Libra on the 12th needs to learn to love and include others and yet keep their emotions in balance, and a little space to themselves.
Notes – Chapter 211. Assagioli cited in Ferrucci, pp. 191-2.

