The Twelve Houses

22.MARS AND ARIES THROUGH THE HOUSES

The planet Mars is associated with the Roman god of the same name and the Greek god Ares. In Greece, Ares, the god of war, was thought of with terror and generally disliked for his furious and unmanageable disposition. The story goes that Hera was so outraged that her husband Zeus had given birth to Athene on his own (she sprang forth fully grown from his head) that she then produced Ares without recourse to him. In this sense, Ares (Mars) is born out of anger and spite, an image of his mother’s fury and rage. In battle, he was accompanied by his squires Deimos (Fear), Phobus (Fright), and Eris (Strife). Not a very jolly band. Contrary to what you might expect, he was hardly ever victorious in battle and often made to look very silly. When Athene effortlessly knocks him over with a stone, the wounded Ares clumsily falls to the ground screaming and crying like ten thousand men. Even two ordinary mortals manage to capture Ares and hold him prisoner in a bottle for thirteen months (not unlike the way we ‘bottle up’ or repress our own anger). Not only made to look ridiculous in battle, he fares just as badly in love: when seducing Aphrodite he is embarrassingly caught in the act and entrapped in a net set by her husband Hephaestus. Invited to watch the spectacle, the other gods come to mock and laugh at the mighty Ares’ plight. (Had the Greeks spoken Yiddish they would have called Ares a ‘klutz’.)
By contrast, the Roman Mars was respected and honoured, and assumed an even more elevated position in the pantheon than the great god Jupiter. The Romans worshipped Mars not only as a god of war but also a god of vegetation and fertility, a god of spring. The Latin root of his name is associated either withmarormas, words which signify ‘to shine’ and describe the generative force. He was called Mars Gradivus, from the Latingrandiri– to become big, to grow. This time he is accompanied by his squires Honos (Honour) and Virtus (Virtue).
The Grecian disapproval of Ares as coarse and brutish and the Roman reverence of Mars as honourable and virtuous are indicative of two aspects of aggression: those forms we deplore and those forms we must not disown if we are to survive and grow. Mars can represent brute force, blind rage, impetuosity and a recklessness which makes us look stupid, but it can also be understood as a kind of healthy aggression – the positive impulse to comprehend and master the external world. Healthy aggression is the drive in living matter to express itself, the power which impels a seed to germinate. A positive Mars enables us to achieve independence, gives us the ability to stand our own ground and make choices which are self-directing. A healthy Mars provides the impetus to learn new skills and is the very basis of achievement in life (wegrapplewith an issue, weattacka problem, wemastera difficulty).
The house position of Mars indicates where either one or both these forms of aggression and assertiveness will be operating. The distinction between the two may not always be clear: the child who rebels angrily against authority is being aggressive but is also manifesting a drive towards independence which is a vital and necessary part of growing up. By house, Mars shows where we need to attack life, take risks, bedaring, and affirm our initiative, freedom and independence. It is also that area of life in which we may be prone to belligerence, passionate over-stimulation, accidents, too great a degree of competitiveness, violence and an insatiable drive for power. If Mars is ‘bottled up’ in a house, this may give rise to a sense of hopelessness, helplessness and subsequently depression via that sphere of experience. We also might provoke others into anger in that domain.
Aries on the cusp of a house or contained within it is similar to Mars in a house. The individual should meet that area of life with courage and vigour in order to unfold his or her unique potentialities and fulfil the life-plan. If we are depressed or psychologically down, we might try turning our attention to the house with Aries on the cusp as a means of ‘getting things started again’.
There will be a relationship between the house with Aries on the cusp (or within it) and the house containing Mars. For instance, if Mars is in the 12th house and Aries is on the cusp of the 10th, the person might develop his or her enterprise and power through a career (Aries on the 10th) which involved work within an institution (Mars, rules of Aries, in the 12th).
Older astrological textbooks assign Mars co-rulership of Scorpio; therefore any house with Scorpio in it may be influenced by the placement of Mars in the chart. Personally, I feel Pluto suitably serves as the sole ruler of Scorpio.
Mars in the 1st
According to the myth, Ares (Mars) sprang forth fully grown from the body of the outraged Hera. Similarly, those with Mars here may find that their anger, fury or actions ‘leap out’ before anything can be done to stop them. At worst, they can be impatient and furious with the slightest obstacle blocking their way and exhibit a constant need to prove their power. Rather than turning their own bodies into a battlefield or taking out their aggression on whoever comes along, they will benefit from some sort of regular physical exercise or competitive sport. The disciplines of tai-chi, yoga, karate or the various body-therapies (which allow, and work creatively with, the cathartic discharge of anger and tension) are also recommended.
At best, those with Mars in the 1st are authentic, spontaneous and refreshing. Without appearing too blunt or rude, they can be honest and self-directing, possessing the courage to respect their own priorities rather than playing a role for somebody else. They are meant to meet life ‘head on’. Rather than waiting for something to happen, people with this placement should take the first step.
Mars in the 1st is most noticeable in a fire sign but even if placed in watery Cancer or Pisces, they will still evince a strong presence whether they speak up or not. If those with Mars in this house appear shy and withdrawn, then other aspects in the chart are impinging on its expression and these should be examined. In some cases, they may need to be reminded that it is permissible to ask for what they want in life, rather than covertly manipulating others into giving it to them.
The urge to be the masters of their own destiny is usually strong and they will grapple against all odds to satisfy their desires. The Duke of Windsor, who abdicated the crown to marry the woman of his choice, was born with Mars in Aries in the 1st. Ernest Hemingway, obsessed with proving to the world that he was the epitome of a ‘real man’, had Mars in Virgo in the 1st.
Mars in the 1st often calls for a fair degree of stamina, strength, fight and independence even very early in life.
Mars in the 2nd
If we understand a planet in a house to define the way in which a person can best approach that area of life to unfold the potentiality, then Mars in the 2nd calls for aggressive, assertive and daring action in the pursuit of money and possessions. They may have to take risks and chances to attain what they so desperately want. Unfortunately, this ‘go out and get it quality’ may prove counter-productive if their manner is too rash, impatient and abrupt. Machiavelli is reputed to have been born with Mars in the 2nd.
More generally, this placement describes a strong desire nature, with an urgency to enjoy the material world and the realm of the senses. While Venus in the 2nd turns on her seductive charms to allure and entice others to give her what she wants, Mars in this position operates more on the premise that ‘I want what I want and I want it now’. If those with Mars in the 2nd don’t take the initiative to go after what they want themselves, then they reach in the cupboard for their favourite whine: ‘Give me, bring me, buy me, take me!’ They also might take out their aggression on objects, smashing a prized vase to underline a point during an argument.
On a more positive note, their innate inner resources are characterized by courage and initiative and they could excel at any work which required these qualities. They will defend and fight for what they value, although they could also force what they value onto others.
For them, money and possessions are concrete symbols of their power and strength. In fact, we can understand these people better if we realize that they are basically trying to assert and affirm their individual existence, ‘alive-ness’ and vitality (Mars) by showing the world just how effectively they can go out and get what they want (2nd). (Even so, I would still keep my distance from them on the first day of Harrods sale.)
Mars in the 3rd
By asserting themselves on the environment (usually through their words, opinions, knowledge or points of view), people with Mars in the 3rd affirm their power, vitality and existence. Although many of us are afraid to say what we really think, this is precisely what those with Mars in the 3rd must do – if possible, of course, with tact, the universal antidote to a bad case of Mars.
Some may be afraid that being clear and direct is too rude or blunt. As a result, instead of saying what they really want to say, they resort to dropping large hints and heaving great sighs. Unfortunately, in any house containing Mars there appears to be a kind of storage tank which can accommodate only a certain amount of unexpressed thought, feeling or action before it blows up and makes a huge mess. Ultimately, with Mars in the 3rd, it is better to say what one is feeling or thinking rather than suppressing anything for too long.
There is usually an active, eager mind with quick repartee. A piercing intellect, a strong vocabulary or sharp verbal ability may be stockpiled as the necessary weapons with which to mount any advance. Although sometimes those with a 3rd house Mars may ‘ram’ their thoughts down another person’s throat, their words also have the capacity to arouse others to action. Then again, they may spend as much time fighting their own thoughts as challenging those of other people. They can attack any subject ofinterest with zeal, and there is a natural desire to talk or write about whatever excites them. Some may ‘blow off steam’ through writing down their thoughts and feelings. A good form of self-therapy might be composing an angry letter to someone with whom they are furious, and then ripping it up.
Those with Mars in the 3rd find their own initiative and learn how to assert themselves by constellating power games with others in the early environment. Therefore this is one of the prime placements for conflicts with siblings, teachers and neighbours. However, when caught for something they shouldn’t be doing, rather than owning responsibility, they may exclaim that it was their brother or sister, something they read, or a video nasty which put them up to it.
Because of a restless and highly strung nervous system, these people should strive to develop some degree of control and caution, especially on any form of journey or travel. Mars in the 3rd may also need to ‘siphon off’ excess energy through sport and exercise. Some may find tinkering with the car or other mechanical things relaxing.
It is an old adage that ‘thoughts have wings’. Mars in the 3rd is powerful on the mental plane and any strongly felt thought could affect the environment whether or not it is directly spoken or acted upon. In a sense, the mind is like a sharp instrument or tool, which if handled in the right fashion can be highly effective in cutting through anything; but if employed incorrectly it can be dangerous and destructive, both to the self or others. Regardless of the aspects to Mars, it is ultimately this person’s choice which way the implement is used.
Mars in the 4th (and Aries on the IC)
Anything in the 4th house may be hidden from view. But, sooner or later, the drive to express the self latent in a 4th house Mars can no longer remain underground. And like anything which has been locked away for any length of time in the basement, it is not likely to be very pretty when you finally let it out. This placement suggests a hidden aggressiveness and anger that needs to be brought to the surface, analysed, reintegrated into the personality, and consciously directed to constructive ends. At first Mars may appear as intense fury and rage, erupting volcanically all over the place, surprising both those who spew it and anybody within close range. Once the Mars is ‘freed’, however, those with this placement eventually grow more adept and graceful at expressing and honouring everything that is going on inside them – the nasty bits as well as the good. Reconnecting to a 4th house Mars, like drinking a well-known beer, enlivens the parts other planets can’t reach. A kind of juicy vitality which wasn’t there before pervades much more of the life.
When most people come home to roost after a hard day’s work, they just want to take off their shoes, mix a drink, put their feet up and watch television. But for those with Mars in the 4th, it is after they’ve ‘clocked off’ that their day begins. It is within the home sphere and personal life that they are likely to evince their greatest drive and enterprise, not to mention their domineering and aggressive streaks. In this respect they are not unlike a certain type of creature called a cichlid fish. These war-like fish need other fish on whom they can vent their aggression. If a pair of them is isolated from a tank containing other fish, then the male will turn his aggression towards his spouse and offspring. Similarly, those with Mars in the 4th may displace the anger they feel but don’t express to other people onto those innocently waiting for them back at home. Well-mannered and docile at work, they may come home spoiling for a fight.Aggression can be displaced in other ways however: digging in the garden, building an extension on the house, provoking someone to get angry at them, or falling down the stairs, etc.
The father (or hidden parent) may be experienced as powerful and masterly, or as pushy, argumentative, sexual and potentially violent. Those with this placement may have to do battle with the father in order to reclaim their own sense of autonomy and freedom of expression. They may not succeed in this until they establish a home of their own and there is usually a strong urge to do so. Often they are descended from a background of ‘survivors’, and they, too, possess a mighty resilience – they can only be held down for so long before they bounce back fighting.
With Aries on the IC or in the 4th, there is a deep need to find the self in one’s own right rather than to rely on the tradition or patterns of the family of origin. As those with Mars or Aries at the Nadir probe further into themselves, they will discover untapped reserves of energy and creativity yearning for a purposeful outlet. Sometimes it is not till later in the second half of life that they are free enough from ties and restrictions to fully attend to the question, ‘But what doIwant?’
Mars in the 5th
The 5th house is the house of play. And when Mars plays, there is no doubt who is boss of the sandbox. The competitive spirit is very great, and if you build a bigger or better castle than your friend with Mars in the 5th, watch out – you may end up with sand in your eyes. Who said it’s not whether you win or lose, but how you play the game that counts? Not likely somebody with Mars in Leo’s natural house.
And the same applies to life, love and creativity. It’s not good enough just todosomething – it must be done dramatically and with all the heart. On the plus side, there is a natural vitality and enthusiasm which stamps the individuality on everything those with Mars in the 5th undertake. They may not be another Picasso, but the picture they paint is very special – at least to them. And who’s to deny it, if even for just a few days or moments the act of creating from inside themselves has given them a greater feeling for who they are or enhanced their sense of power, identity and vitality.
Often there is a love of competitive sport or feats involving some degree of daring, risk or strenuous physical exertion. And with the same zestful and impulsive spirit, they pursue the greatest sport of them all, the game of love and romance. Nor are they just looking to make a match; nothing short of a whole forest fire will do. Provided those with Mars in the 5th don’t frighten others off with their intensity, how soon the flames of love are extinguished or whether the fire quickly spreads somewhere else will depend, to a large degree, on the aspects and sign placement of Mars.
Children will catch something of the Mars projection. The initial enthusiasm to produce a family will probably be very strong; but the daily drudgery and sacrifices involved may be much less appealing. How can they paint pictures, take tennis lessons, make love, go to the opera, and have the time to raise children as well? It’s not surprising that people with this placement bear offspring with strong independent streaks. The children would need to learn to stand on their own fairly quickly and develop strong enough wills to combat and compete with the demands of the parent’s 5th house Mars.

Mars in the 6th
The possible manifestations of Mars in the 6th house become clearer if we compare and contrast the ways in which the Greek Ares and the Roman Mars would approach the affairs of this house.
First, picture Ares mounting an attack on the housework. Within ten minutes he would have whizzed through every room and nearly all the corners as quickly as possible, hopefully not knocking over too many things in the process. His motto might be ‘A job worth doing is a job worth doing in a hurry.’ Or after losing yet another battle with his sister Athene, he might immediately take out his rage 6th-house fashion by furiously scrubbing the kitchen floor, yelling at a servant, or kicking the dog.
Ares would push his body hard. Besides exhausting himself continually chasing around from one thing to another, he could attract accidents due to recklessness and inner discord.
Although it is not like Ares, if he did hold in his anger, he would probably suffer regularly from headaches or more generally turn his aggression against the body. (With the planet Mars in the 6th, feelings and impulses register very strongly in the body and must find some sort of expression if it is not going to short-circuit and blow a fuse.)
Of course, Ares would be a big hit at the office. Unlikely to tolerate someone lording over him and probably exhibiting a tendency to run roughshod over co-workers, it’s fortunate that he prefers to attend to his job independently.
In striking contrast, the Roman Mars handles the affairs of the 6th house very differently. Seeing every little thing he does as a reflection of who he is, he would take fastidious pride in his work down to the last detail. Concerned with achieving independence and self-sufficiency in the running of everyday affairs, he would welcome the opportunity to learn new skills, and gain great satisfaction mastering tasks which challenged him.
Although he could be obsessive at times about the body’s smooth functioning, much energy would be directed into caring for and maintaining the body. He recognizes the body as the vehicle through which he can express himself and prove his power, and naturally he wants to keep it in good shape.
Somewhat reminiscent of his Greek counterpart and due to a strong belief about how something should be done, the Roman Mars (in the 6th) may experience difficulty and impatience with co-workers, although in the right situations a joint effort could prove stimulating. But usually Mars in the 6th wants to run the show himself. He might, however, fight battles for workers’ rights or stand up for a colleague whom he believes is being mistreated. Mars in the 6th might equally support an animal rights group.
In general, a well-aspected Mars in the 6th tends to act like the Roman Mars. But difficult aspects to Mars in this house (hard angles to it from the Sun, Jupiter, Uranus and Pluto especially) are more likely to manifest, initially at least, as the Greek Ares.
Mars in the 7th
By house, Mars shows the area of life in which we need to take action and assert ourselves. In the 7th, this gives rise to a strong urge to define the identity and gain a sense of power through relationships with other people. I have seen many instances of this placement in the charts of young men and women who rush haphazardly into marriage – often inspired by the first taste of sexual passion or partially motivated by the desire to escape from the restrictions of a difficult or oppressive family background.Through marriage they believe they will find themselves in their own right. More often what they do discover is that they have replaced one form of tyranny with another. The initial sexual attraction may die down, but the power games are still there.
Some people with this placement come on so strongly at first that they frighten others away. Conversely, there may be an attraction to someone with obvious Mars qualities – the bold, straightforward, dynamic hero or heroine who can relieve them of the burden of making their own decisions in life. After a while, they may become angry or resentful at the bossiness of the other person and attempt to take back the power they once so freely handed over. But it is unfair to condemn Mars in the 7th only to relationships filled with strife and contention, although some people seem to thrive very well on a diet of fireworks. There are many examples of Mars in this house which manifest in lively, stimulating relationships where the partners positively ‘spark off’ one another, while still allowing the mate to maintain personal freedom. However, there is the danger of taking their aggression out on those closest and most dear to them, or not so subtly arousing other people to anger and thereby conjuring a justifiable excuse to vent their own. Those with Mars in the 7th also appear to need fairly constant reassurance of their worth in the eyes of other people. They are also likely to be the first to stand up and defend another person if they believe that he or she is being unjustly accused.
Mars in the 8th
Those with Mars in the 8th come alive in joint enterprises where they can give and receive all they can. Usually there is a shade more subtlety to Mars in this house than in his other domains, although the clumsy Greek Ares may evince his characteristic impetuosity by rushing into hastily conceived financial deals. Some people with Mars in the 8th will gain a sense of honour and virtue by standing up for their deeply felt beliefs, and will try to challenge and convert others who don’t share the same values. Others with Mars in the 8th find the prospect of appropriating the values and possessions of another person much more rewarding and enticing. A difficultly aspected Mars could indicate fights with the marriage partner over joint resources, battles over legacies and inheritances, trouble with a belligerent tax-inspector, and conflicts with get-rich-quick business partners, so some degree of caution is advised in these areas.
But it is in the more intimate arena of the bedroom that an 8th house Mars most clearly exposes itself. Their passions are strong, but sexual expression may be more than just a means of relieving built-up physical tension: for many, sex is a contest and Mars is determined to be the victor. Again, we can understand these people better if we realize that in acting this way they are attempting to affirm and define their identity and power. The principle of the Sun distinguishes us from others, but we need Mars to prove our point; and whether, in the 8th house, the point is given or taken, Mars here likes to be in charge. With a little bit of thought it’s not hard to appreciate that there is more to a person’s sexual taste than meets the eye; and fortunately or unfortunately for some, Mars in the 8th may take out their aggression in the bedroom. Or due to guilt and ambivalence, Mars in the 8th may resort to its second favourite battle-cry: ‘They made me do it,’ blaming others for forcing them into situations they somehow help to contrive.
By meeting it in others or through their own selves, those with Mars in the 8th often discover and have to grapple with the darker emotions of blind lust, envy, greed, jealousy, etc. The need or ability to transmute these seething feelings into a moreconstructive expression depends, to a large degree, on the aspects to Mars. If Mars is difficultly aspected by the outer planets, it is usually most pressing that the raw, primordial side of Mars be rechannelled in other ways.
Sometimes there is a burning interest in the esoteric or the occult. Caution should be taken when exploring or experimenting in anything mediumistic in nature: there is the danger of projecting their own anger and aggression onto something ‘out there’ and then experiencing the disowned quantity as turning around and pursuing them. Although Mars can hardly be defined as covert, in the 8th he does have a kind of detective-like ability to probe subtly and persistently into what is hidden or secret. If those with this placement sense something wrong or askew in a relevant person or situation, for better or for worse, they are not easily able to let it rest.
The Scorpio Dylan Thomas wrote, ‘Do not go gentle into that good night.’ In deaths and transformations of a physical or psychological nature, Mars in the 8th will usually follow that advice.
Mars in the 9th
We might think there is a chance to breathe some fresh air when we enter the realm of the 9th – the house of religion, philosophy, long journeys and higher education. But history has shown that in many respects this is the stickiest and bloodiest battlefield of them all.
With Mars in the 9th, God is not just sought after, but hunted. Those with this placement usually pursue and stand by strong philosophical or religious beliefs. Believing that their version of the truth is the only one, they might promote and defend it with a crusader-like zeal. And some might say why shouldn’t they, since it is probably formulated in such a fashion as to support and justify their deepest desires and passions in life anyway. Although the image of God may be an angry and fiery one, He is probably cast enough in their own likeness to understand and indulge those occasions when they may have to break His rules. For a few with this placement, God even manages to accept killing, raping and pillaging provided that these things are done in His name. In this way, some people with Mars in the 9th are culpable of displacing responsibility for acting out their own cruel drives onto God. Generally, before they undertake something they like to have the justification of some higher law behind them.
However, others may express a 9th house Mars by being angry at God Himself. Like Tevya inFiddler on the Roof, they shake a fist at heaven or go even further, and start telling God how He should run the show.
There is often a strong urge to travel, and sometimes they may just ‘pick up and go’ on the spur of the moment. A woman with Mars in this house might develop a powerful attraction to a foreign man, or someone who offers to broaden her horizons in some way. In like manner, there may be a passion for one particular culture.
Mars in the 9th will also influence the sphere of higher education. Expansive knowledge on one or two subjects gives them a sense of power and authority. The Mars may be projected onto an institution of higher learning or one particular professor with whom they do battle.
Careers which offer a chance to preach – such as writing, teaching, publishing or the ministry – may attract those with Mars in this house. The Gauquelins found Mars in the 9th prominent in the charts of champion sportspeople, and top executives, military leaders and physicians.
Finally, on a more mundane level, Mars may describe something about their relationship with in-laws. This, like the proverbial mother-in-law, speaks for itself.
Mars in the 10th (and Aries on the MC)
Mars is one of the most ambitious of all the placements to be found in the 10th. There is a need to be seen as powerful, strong and assertive, and a career which brings these qualities to the fore may be sought. Those with this placement want to be remembered as having done something worthy of attention – honourable, if possible, but otherwise if there is no other way. In some cases, the ambition of Mars can turn into a ruthless clawing to the top or a situation where the means justifies the ends: John Mitchell, one of Nixon’s cabinet indicted in the Watergate affair, has Mars in Gemini (the sign of communication) in this house.
If the 10th house is taken to be the mother (or shaping parent), then the archetypal principles symbolized by Mars would have passed in some way between her and the offspring with this placement. In a positive light, the mother could have been experienced as masterly and powerful, thereby modelling to the child how to be strong in the world. Difficult placements to Mars, however, suggest a more turbulent relationship. The mother might have been seen as pushy and contentious, and the child, therefore, may have grown up loathing her power or fearing her wrath. Later in life, the way this person relates to the world will be influenced by the early experiences with the mother. The world may be seen as a place in which one has to fight to get along, or a position of autonomy is sought so that one is no longer in such a subservient role. At some stage in life, children with this placement may have to battle with the mother to free themselves from her control. Some may succeed to such a degree that roles are reversed and they end up the ones running their own mothers’ lives. Later problems with bosses and authority figures in general are often evinced with Mars in the 10th.
Aries on the MC or in the 10th is similar to Mars there. In this case, the house position of Mars will reveal more about the kinds of qualities a person brings into public view. Work which allows for initiative, leadership and a fair degree of autonomy is recommended.
Mars in the 11th
In the 11th, an active participation with friends, groups and organizations provides the outlet for the passion, energy and assertion of Mars. The aspects to Mars in this house, though, will reveal just how welcome this involvement is.
Mars, the essence of personal initiative, is curiously placed in the group-minded 11th. While those with Mars in the 11th may extol the rhetoric of teamwork and co-operation until they are red in the face, they often have a difficult time adjusting or compromising their own strongly felt ideas and opinions with others. While friendly Venus effortlessly blends and harmonizes for the sake of peace and love, Mars is concerned with imposingitsway despite all odds. Good old Mars, spoiling for a fight as usual and in this case choosing one of the most appropriate houses in the chart to find it.
Mars in the 11th represents a dilemma which is actually inherent in all of us. By nature, we are social beings (11th) and yet we all strongly feel the urge to assert our identity as autonomous individuals (Mars). We form groups on the basis of common interests, ideals and aims, but it is precisely in those groups where there is a close identification among members that the most bitter disputes arise. (The early Christian Churchis one example.) As soon as we grow too closely identified, our autonomy is threatened and the urge to split, differentiate and disrupt naturally makes itself felt. And Mars, schooled in the arts of aggression and self-assertion, is just the man for the job. In the end, however, the trick for Mars in the 11th is to unite with others for a common purpose and yet not lose its individuality.
Mars in the 11th can play other roles as well. Those with this placement often have the ability to arouse the group to action. Conversely, being a member of a group or crowd may give Mars the exact justification needed to do something he might never allow himself to do on his own. In this sense, Mars in the 11th might displace personal responsibility onto the group. Those with Mars in this house may take up a cause which they feel will improve society in some way or champion the downtrodden. Care should be taken that such crusading is not done so belligerently that more harm than good is done.
The possible interpretations of Mars in relation to groups also apply to personal friendship as well. Mars may be the first to stand up to defend a friend, but in the name of autonomy he may be the first to attack or fend off that same person. Some with this placement could try to run and direct the lives of their friends in an overbearing manner, while others will accuse friends of trying to manipulate and boss them. Other examples of the likely effects of Mars in this house have been covered in the general discussion of the 11th house in Part II of the book.
If well-aspected, Mars in the 11th is usually quite clear about achieving its goals and objectives in life. Problems occur if Jupiter or Neptune, in particular, cloud the judgement, influencing Mars to aim unrealistically or dispersing his energy unproductively. Saturn and Pluto aspecting an 11th house Mars may also set up stumbling blocks which Mars may have to learn to work his way around.
Mars in the 12th
Mars is at his most manic and inconsistent in the 12th house. Sometimes, as the Gauquelins found, he is out there in full gear for all to see; at other times, he is just nowhere in sight. And if this isn’t enough to confuse you, he reappears now and again behind different masks. It’s not like Mars to be so elusive – somewhere along the line he’s picked up a trick or two from Neptune.
In the 12th, the natural aggression of Mars may sometimes be disguised as a vague and passive dissatisfaction with life: nothing feels right but he can’t put his finger on what’s wrong. At other times, Mars resorts to one of his favourite disguises, The Incredible Sulk – whining endlessly about everything that’s wrong but refusing to do anything constructive about it. Having driven everyone around the bend, he miraculously snaps out of it as soon as he has managed to make someone else express his rage for him. Mars in the 12th may consciously deny his anger and assertion and yet vicariously enjoy violence and have dreams or fantasies of a destructive nature. Hidden somewhere in his psyche is an incendiary device which can flare up in sudden episodes of uncontrolled behaviour. To complicate matters, Mars in the 12th may be the one to act out the unexpressed stirrings and anger of those around him: the battles he ends up fighting may not even be his own.
Mars needs to affirm his sense of personal power and identity: in the 12th this is sometimes paradoxically achieved by giving over his will to another person or higher cause. Although the study of successful sportspeople has shown that it is in this housethat Mars comes first and wins his gold, there is no other domain in which Mars can so graciously put himself aside for other people. The ‘me-first’ attitude associated with this planet may be replaced by a sense of ‘You-first and I’ll help you’ or ‘Rather than just doing it for me, I want to do it for everyone.’ While this sounds noble, and often is, sometimes the abnegation of personal responsibility to serve a greater purpose inspires disastrous consequences. John DeLorean, the untiring business executive apparently determined to promote his large-scale schemes at all costs, was born with Mars in Aries in the 12th.
The problem with Mars in the 12th is not really a lack of fight but the fact that the troops are sometimes deployed in the wrong direction. Rather than using his energy to face life ‘head on’, Mars in this house frequently devises highly effective strategies for retreating from it altogether through escapist or self-destructive behaviour. In whatever house Mars is placed, he has the urge to go out and get what he wants: in the 12th house, the desired goal may be the dissolution and transcendence of life’s limits and boundaries. And just as Venus in the 12th can’t love enough, Mars in this house feels that he can never do enough. According to Lois Rodden inAstro-Data II: The AmericanBook of Charts, the actor George Sanders (Mars in Cancer in the 12th) featured inninetymovies in thirty-six years but killed himself because he was bored.
Those with Mars in the 12th might benefit from actively investigating and interpreting the meaning of their dreams. As with Mars in the 4th and the 8th, there is also the ability to perform actions in a covert manner or for reasons not immediately obvious to others. Sometimes institutions will play an important part in their lives, although anger and hostility may be unleashed on nurses, prison wardens or some poor librarian who can’t find the book they want. Other possible effects of Mars in the 12th can be found in the general discussion of this house in Part II of the book.

