The Twelve Houses

23.JUPITER AND SAGITTARIUS THROUGH THE HOUSES

The planet Jupiter is associated with the Roman god of the same name, and the Greek god Zeus. In Greek mythology, Zeus was the majestic god of the heavens, ruling limitless and expansive space. Residing in the upper ethers of the air and on mountaintops, Zeus was believed to be omniscient, a god who knew and saw everything. From his high perspective, he viewed life on earth and dispensed both good and evil, although he was mostly thought of as compassionate and benevolent. His daily rounds included protecting the weak and innocent, unleashing thunderbolts on the wicked for their own good, averting any catastrophes which might come up in heaven or on earth, and squabbling with his jealous wife Hera, whom he felt restricted him too much. Somehow, he also managed to make room in his already busy schedule for an extraordinary number of extra-marital affairs. Acting on the spur of the moment and with a zest equal to 6,000 i.u.’s of Vitamin E a day, he enthusiastically chased after various goddesses, mortal women, and the occasional smooth-skinned young boy. While not always successful, he nonetheless appeared to take great delight in the pursuit of his ever-changing objectives, transforming himself into a bull one day, a swan the next, and a shower of gold another. A consummate actor, he loved playing roles. While producing numerous children as a result of these escapades, he left the job of raising them to other people.
The question is: how do we squeeze all this and more into any one house? Needless to say, the house in the chart containing Jupiter is an area of life in which we require a great deal of room to grow and explore. It is where we are not content with that which is routine or humdrum, but rather where we are propelled to experience life more fully and completely. Whether or not a Hera is there to restrict us, we are not necessarily unhappy with what we already have in that domain, but we still want more and there always seems further to go. Jupiter is ultimately more interested in what might be around the corner than the reality at hand.
As you might imagine, problems in Jupiter’s house generally stem from overextending ourselves in that area. Wherever Jupiter is in the chart, we never know what is enough until we know what is more than enough. Also, because Jupiter viewed life from so far up, he didn’t always examine things as closely as he should have. A difficultly aspected Jupiter in a house could indicate where we take action based on misguided judgement or perspective, usually as a result of being overly optimistic or too enthusiastic about what is possible. And like the promiscuous god, it is also the sphere in which we may sow many creative seeds but not always stay around to attend to their growth. We start something, but before we know it something else has caught our attention.
We mustn’t forget Jupiter’s important role as the guardian of law and religion and the noble protector of the people. The populace prayed to him for help, guidance, inspiration, benevolence and preservation. His presence in a house makes us hopeful, positive and expectant in that area of life as if with him there we are charmed andprotected. And if we entertain such positive feelings and good vibrations as these, it is not surprising that we usually are successful in Jupiter’s sphere. A danger exists, however, that we might sometimes feel betrayed if it happens that what we enthused over doesn’t turn out to be as wonderful as we had hoped. But usually, even if we are let down in Jupiter’s house, he still makes sure that we land on our feet.
The planet Jupiter represents the symbol-making capacity of the psyche and we normally imbue the events and experience of the house Jupiter is in with great significance. While this may give rise to histrionics, it is also through Jupiter’s house that we glimpse a larger pattern, order or meaning to life. In his domain, we search for the higher rules and laws upon which existence can be based and by which it can be guided. Consciously or not, we look for God there, or endeavour to find within that framework of experience ‘the Truth’ with a capital ‘T’.
Jupiter was prayed to as the Great Preserver of life and the Deliverer from battles and plagues. Sometimes our very survival may depend on being able to give some sort of symbolic meaning to an event or perceive its significance within a larger perspective. The humanistic psychologist, Viktor Frankl, confirmed this function of Jupiter for himself on the basis of his experience in a concentration camp: while interred in Auschwitz, he observed that those who could impart some sense of meaning to the agony they were having to endure were the ones most likely to survive.
Although aspects to Jupiter may distort just how clearly or reasonably we see the ‘truth’, the affairs of the house this planet is in offer us the belief in something greater, the hope for something better, and the sense that life is not just a collection of random events, but has meaning and purposeful intention. When our faith in life begins to falter, it is by looking towards Jupiter’s domain that we may gain the inspiration to travel on.
Jupiter will influence any house with Sagittarius in it. Likewise, the effect of Sagittarius on a house carries much of the same meaning as Jupiter in a house.
In older textbooks, Jupiter is given co-rulership with Neptune of Pisces. Therefore, Jupiter may have some bearing on any house with Pisces in it. I personally feel that Neptune serves the job as sole ruler of Pisces very well without needing Jupiter’s help.
Jupiter in the 1st
Accompanied by a fanfare and a drum roll, Jupiter in the 1st house appears on the scene. The house placement of Jupiter indicates where we are open to higher inspiration. Those with Jupiter in the 1st house of the self are natural philosophers who attempt to answer some of the ‘big’ questions of existence. In whatever they do, they have the ability to inspire and arouse new life and interest, throwing themselves into something with great initial enthusiasm. Sometimes they are important social, educational or religious thinkers, while others with this placement play out the more sporty side of Jupiter, living the life of the adventurer or gambler. Some are the ‘trendies’ who are up on the latest styles and seen in all the right new places. There are also the nature-loving 1st house Jupiters, who climb mountains to glimpse even more expansive vistas. For some the world is their playground as they rove here and there, encountering others, sharing what they have with them, and then moving on.
If we understand a planet in a house to indicate the best way to meet life in that area, then those with Jupiter in the 1st should seek to expand themselves in ways associated with its sign placement. For instance, Jupiter in Pisces should explore ways of openingup the feelings; Jupiter in Aquarius will grow through expanding its understanding; and Jupiter in Leo through increasing the capacity for self-expression. For instance, according to one birth time suggested for him, the almost mythic and larger than life superstar Mick Jagger was born with Jupiter in Leo in the 1st. Radiating his being through his music and creative expression (Jupiter in the 1st rules Sagittarius intercepted in the 5th house of creativity), he fills vast concert halls with his powerful presence.
While Jupiter in the 1st wants to go further and faster and can envision far-reaching goals, aspects to Jupiter might indicate other parts of the personality which hold the person back or hinder the progress. It’s probably still best for them to view life as a journey, even if they have to move along at a pace which is much slower than they would like.
In some cases, an inflated sense of identity is one of the dangers of this placement. Innately believing that they have so much to offer which is valuable, expansive and worthwhile, there are those with Jupiter in the 1st who hold nothing back. An exaggerated opinion of themselves may lead them to over-reach or extend beyond their capacities. Sometimes there is a marvellous vision and inspiration but insufficient discipline and concentration to follow something through to completion. Because they so dearly want to free themselves from all restrictions, they may look for the easy way out if the going gets tough.
If Jupiteriswell-aspected, it is likely that the atmosphere in the early environment was conducive to growth and positive self-development, enhancing their creativity and playfulness. Sometimes it indicates travel or many changes of residence while still young. Since Jupiter’s tendency is to inflate and expand, weight can sometimes be a problem for these people.
Jupiter in the 2nd
Those with Jupiter in the 2nd may seek to expand their resources and possessions as a means of gaining greater joy and fullness of life. Taken to an extreme, it could mean the god Mammon is worshipped as the be-all and end-all of existence, or a religious or numinous value is bestowed on monetary and material success. Some might see money and possessions as a symbol of their worth and value. Certain objects may be treasured because they inspire, communicate or symbolize something significant for them. The value system in general (2nd) may be linked to their philosophical and religious beliefs (Jupiter). Some with this placement perceive God’s touch in all the manifestations of nature, glimpsing the underlying patterns and laws expressing through the form world.
The acquisitive instinct is heightened for those with Jupiter in this house and with such a strong motivation, they usually succeed in the material realm. However, what is earned may be spent as quickly as they make it. While they are usually generous, difficult aspects to Jupiter suggest a wastefulness with money and possessions, or a tendency to invest recklessly and unwisely. But should they fall flat on their faces, they generally have the ability to ‘drum up’ money again – just when they are most ‘down and out’, an opportunity comes along which saves them.
The 2nd house represents what constitutes security for us.With Jupiter there, personal safety could be sought through abundance on the material plane; while, for others with this placement, security might mean possessing higher knowledge or sound religious beliefs. Paradoxically, some may feel most secure if they know that at anymoment they are free to get up and go. Innate resources include a natural enthusiasm, an ability to inspire other people, and the capacity to impart practical meaning to life. The desire nature is strong and usually they will believe that there are ‘higher’ justifications for their having what they so urgently want. Therefore, they don’t feel too guilty satisfying their endless appetites. Money could be earned through Jupiterian pursuits such as teaching, travel, the law, import-export trade, spreading religion, etc.
Jupiter in the 3rd
In the 3rd house, Jupiter has a great deal to say. At best, the energy and inspiration which give rise to thoughts or words can be communicated and channelled to others, who are then ‘fired’, enlivened and expanded by what those with Jupiter in this house have shared or made accessible. At worst, they waffle on endlessly, more concerned with the quantity of what they have to say than the quality, pausing now and then to savour the rare genius of their insights.
Jupiter in the 3rd also expands the mind. While this may yield an over-abundance of thoughts on any one topic or a mind which is literally all over the place, it also gives an awareness broad enough to fit any one particular thing happening around them into a larger framework or perspective. While focusing on something specific, they do not lose sight of what is going on in the background and all around it. Some may hurry through a book thinking that the sooner they are done with it the more quickly they can read the next; while others may find that just one sentence is enough to transport them on a journey to other worlds – and hence they never finish the book at all. Similarly, there can be a tendency to ‘read too much’ into another person’s passing comment or glance, and they end up making a Mount Olympus out of a molehill.
One of Jupiter’s main concerns is finding greater fulfilment. In the 3rd, knowledge can be worshipped as a god who offers them increased joy and mastery over life, inclining those with this placement to exhibit an almost insatiable need to learn things. Sometimes this position is referred to as that of ‘the perpetual student’. For them, life is a huge jigsaw puzzle, and the more pieces they can find to fit together the better. Each time two parts click into place a kind of mental orgasm is experienced. Some may think that they have to travel the world sixteen times over to achieve the ultimate release, while others learn sooner or later that there is more than enough just happening between the front door and the nearest travel agency.
Since those with Jupiter in the 3rd are expanded by whatever is around them, this placement normally indicates a good relationship with brothers, sisters, neighbours, etc. Sometimes there is a large number of siblings. However, difficult aspects to Jupiter can manifest in fierce sibling rivalry or the hero-worship of an older brother or sister, and later disappointments if too much has been expected of them. People who have travelled or changed residences many times during childhood and adolescence often have this placement of Jupiter as well. Usually, early schooling is not found too threatening, but welcomed as an opportunity to broaden the horizons beyond what the family has to offer. Writing, teaching, lecturing, study, travel and knowledge of languages should all be encouraged.
Jupiter in the 4th (and Sagittarius on the IC)
At first, the hidden and insular 4th house seems an ill-suited domain for a sky-god like Jupiter. However, true to his nature, he manages to make a very comfortable life for himself in this sphere – provided that his home life does not fence him in too much.
I have seen many charts with Jupiter in the 4th in which the people were born into aristocratic families or had a few well-known ancestors. Through the father’s line, there is often the influence of a foreign culture in the blood. But even if they can’t claim descent from Louis XVI, the last Czar of Russia, or the king of the gypsies, they inherit a religious, philosophical or travelling nature through the background or early home conditions. Like the genie in the bottle, residing deep within those with Jupiter in the 4th is a powerful and expansive spirit wanting to be freed.
They can invest a great deal of energy in establishing the home of their dreams, but they had better ensure there is enough room in it to satisfy their need to move around. Often they benefit from living out of the crowded conditions of the city, and in the more natural and open setting of the country where views and vistas are unobstructed. (I always picture them living on a ranch.) Some may travel from country to country looking for their spiritual home. Rather than aiming for public or professional recognition, they might devote themselves to work on the soul and inner growth. A woman I know with Jupiter in Sagittarius in the 4th is a good example of this placement. Born into an aristocratic home and a lady by birth, she now lives on a spiritual commune in Canada. At first caught between the values of her family and those preached by her guru, she moved back and forth from tea at royal garden parties to washing pots at the ashram. But later, she realized that the best of these separate worlds had something to offer each other. She has brought a renewed sense of spiritual vision to her family while helping her fellow disciples to appreciate those more solid, earthly values of the English tradition.
Jupiter in the 4th may colour the paternal relationship. In some cases the actual father is confused with the image of god: he is seen as noble, majestic and larger than life. Reflecting some of the other qualities of Zeus, the father might be experienced as a promising figure full of potential and inspiration, but with an incorrigible roving eye and bags full of wild oats. Sometimes the father will suppress the Jupiterian side of his nature for the sake of providing the kind of structure and security expected of him; in this case, the child with this placement may grow up with an irresistible urge to enact what the father has not played out.
If Jupiter in the 4th is well aspected, there is an underlying optimism and faith in life which will come to the fore as the person grows older. Generally, it favours a promising old age filled with many interests and pursuits. Contemporaries may lag behind while Jupiter in the 4th is still lively and progressive.
With Sagittarius at the IC there is usually the attempt to build the life on a clear moral or philosophical framework. Sometimes they travel in childhood or grow up in a religious family. If life comes to a standstill, they can renew themselves by strong acts of faith or envisioning some new goal towards which to aim.
Jupiter in the 5th
William Blake, a Sagittarian with Sun conjunct Jupiter in the 5th house, wrote that ‘the road of excess leads to the palace of wisdom.’ For those with this placement, more is definitely better than enough.
The 5th house always enjoys expressing itself; but with Jupiter here, it has to be done with panache and thunderbolts. Through any form of creative self-expression, those with Jupiter in the 5th step into something more spacious, perhaps replicating in their own creativity a sense of Divine creation itself. In other words, by being creative they find ‘God’ in themselves.
The 5th house is the house of play and nobody plays quite like Jupiter. It’s hardly likely that the sandbox is large enough (Malibu beach would do better), but their castles must be bigger and more imaginative than the next fellow’s. Unlike Mars, who chases you out of the sandbox altogether if you get in his way, Jupiter in the 5th is willing to co-operate on joint ventures with his playmates, provided that he is the one to direct the show. After all, his vision is really the most interesting and if he likes it then it has to be best for everyone. Even if a friend slips him an idea or two, Jupiter will expand and elaborate on it until it is totally his own.
Those with this placement should have no trouble filling their lives with hobbies and artistic outlets which they find exciting and satisfying, provided that they stay with these long enough to develop a fair degree of expertise. They like to test themselves against life, and there is sometimes a taste for adventurous sports, games of chance, and playing the stock market. For them to feel most alive, each new hurdle must be that little bit bigger than the last.
With Jupiter in the 5th, a love of the amorous chase is highly evident. Naturally romantic, they seek outlets in relationships and affairs. A case in question in the 1980s was Prince Andrew, with Jupiter in Sagittarius in this house, who between flying helicopters, pursuing actresses, blessing new ventures and dodging reporters was as good a modern-day equivalent to Zeus as could be found. However, if Jupiter is difficultly aspected, their perspective in respect to 5th house matters may be impaired by their own subjectivity, excitement and over-enthusiasm.
Usually this placement indicates a good rapport with children, who grow up with a philosophical or spiritual outlook or a strong desire to broaden their horizons through travel and adventure. Some parents with this placement may project their own unlived-out yearnings and wanderlust onto their offspring. In certain cases, this may spur the child on to greater achievements; while in other instances, in an attempt to be a person in his or her own right, the child may have to betray some of the parent’s ideals. Nonetheless, the parent-child relationship usually survives intact. Jupiter was prayed to as the protector of the people, and it is interesting to note that Princess Anne, the President of the Save the Children Fund, was born with Jupiter in Pisces in the 5th. (Jupiter rules horses and her equestrian abilities are shown by this placement as well.)
Jupiter in the 6th
Jupiter may seem a little cramped in the 6th house of health, adjustment to necessity, and the management of mundane affairs. But regardless of what he does with his time, he always manages to make something significant of it. Those with Jupiter in this house seek (or should seek) to experience meaning in life through work and service to others. Self-purification and the refinement of their skills and abilities afford them a greater sense of well-being and satisfaction.
As in the 3rd house, Jupiter may manifest in different ways. In a bid to do as much as possible for themselves or others, some might hurry through one task in order to move quickly onto the next. Others, however, will apply themselves to any small matter with the utmost concern and diligence. As in the traditional Japanese tea ceremony, a tiny detail can assume cosmic importance.
Pride will be taken in their work and they usually have a great deal of energy to contribute to any employment situation. Although Jupiter is prone to believe that his way of doing things is best, they will normally have good relationships with co-workers.workers. This position could indicate work of a Jupiterian nature – involving travel, public relations, educational activities, the promotion of art, culture, sports, religion, etc.
Some may burden themselves with too many duties in life and not leave the time to care for their own bodies. Others may become almost obsessed with health or making the body a better vessel for the spirit. These people might undertake any new diet, technique or exercise which promises heaven on earth. In fact, the whole day may be strewn with such activities: waking up at seven, taking six deep cleansing breaths, a two-mile jog, a hot and cold shower, some yoga, meditation, and then a breakfast of bran, grapefruit and one walnut. Although Jupiter in the 6th is normally associated with excesses of food and drink, I have noticed the extremes of Jupiter just as frequently operating the other way – week-long fasts eating nothing but grapes, for instance.
In a number of instances I have run across Jupiter in the 6th in the charts of people who developed cancer, but in a good proportion of these cases they have overcome the disease. By nature this planet represents over-production and in these cases, it is the cells in the body which proliferate. There is an intimate relationship between mind and body, or psyche and soma, and any planet in the 6th has an influence to bear on this coupling. For instance, if too much time is spent serving others then a hidden resentment could build up in the person: ‘When is it my turn?’ or ‘What about me?’ Sickness may be the only way the person can justify getting some attention for the self. Jupiter asks that we grow, expand and develop in different areas of our life and if for any reason we are avoiding doing so, then the cells in the body may assume the job for us, and they start growing and expanding. Fortunately, it is not difficult for people with Jupiter in the 6th to understand illness symbolically and see it in the context of their lives as a whole. In the pursuit of a cure, they make significant alterations and changes in their entire lifestyle and philosophy of living. Those with Jupiter in the 6th could be the people who inspire others to participate more positively in their own self-help. By contrast, a poorly aspected 6th house Jupiter is sometimes an indication of the kind of person who falls ill on holidays or trips abroad.
Jupiter in the 7th
Examining Zeus’ own married life will help us to understand how Jupiter works in the 7th. He had a number of marriages before settling down (in a manner of speaking only) with Hera, the wife officially associated with his sovereignty. One account relates the story of their courtship in this way. It was the middle of winter and Zeus appeared before Hera in the form of a cuckoo. The bird was so frozen by the cold that Hera took it to her breast to warm it. At that moment, Zeus, eager as always to take advantage of an opportunity, changed back to his usual form. Resisting at first, the shrewd Hera finally consented to give way if he promised to marry her. Those with Jupiter in the 7th may resort to all sorts of tricks or disguises to capture the partner of their choice.
The marriage was not an easy one, mostly due to Zeus’ philandering and Hera’s passionate jealousy. This dynamic often replays itself in the relationships of those with Jupiter in this house. One partner gets to be the faithful and obedient one while the other justifies running free-range. Sometimes the roles will reverse overnight. In the few cases in which Hera decided to enjoy herself, Zeus was instantly back at home complaining about his wife’s absence. Similarly, Jupiter in the 7th suffers from a classic freedom-closeness dilemma. They want their independence to explore different facetsof life, and yet they want their security as well. (On an archetypal level, spirit as symbolized by Jupiter yearns to be free of the restrictions of matter represented by Hera, and yet spirit needs matter through which to express itself.) Ideally, those with Jupiter in this house do best with partners who share and understand their urge to have other interests outside of the relationship.
Jupiter in the 7th can manifest in other ways. They may project Jupiter onto a partner and look for somebody to play God to them. In this sense, they are prey to anyone who promises them the world, and liable to disappointment when they only get Blackpool. The partner can reflect Jupiter in other respects – he or she may be foreign, prestigious and influential, religious or philosophical, spendthrift, or a lovable rascal who perpetually says one thing and does another. Most positively, the partner can bring warmth, generosity, good faith, material wealth, optimism and an expansion of awareness into the life of those with this placement. Conversely, the person with Jupiter in the 7th can offer these same qualities in return and more often than not the relationship is beneficial to both people’s lives. Even if a partnership fails, there is the abiding hope of a better one just around the corner. If those with Jupiter in the 7th never marry, it is usually because they are reluctant to be tied down and lose alternatives.
The 7th house describes our relationship to society in general. Jupiter there favours social and communal interaction as a natural means of broadening and expanding the horizons in life. Well-aspected, Jupiter in this house inclines towards success in legal matters.
Jupiter in the 8th
Jupiter in the 8th can translate literally into expansion through other people’s money. One woman I knew with Jupiter in Leo (conjunct Pluto) in the 8th worked as a ‘go-go’ dancer in a Hollywood discotheque in the early 1970s. A middle-aged self-made millionaire who attended the club took a genuinely fatherly interest in her. Absolutely no sex was exchanged, but he bought her a home of her own in fashionable Laurel Canyon. Jupiter protects and looks after us in whatever house he is placed. In the case of the 8th, he does this through other people’s resources.
Jupiter in the 8th can indicate a financially beneficial marriage, good business partnerships, windfalls through inheritance, and a tax inspector you regularly play golf with and allow to win. If Jupiter is not too badly aspected, those with this placement can trust their sensitivity to future trends in the market place and follow successfully any intuitions they may have about the direction in which a venture or event is heading.
Less mundanely, people with Jupiter in the 8th seek expansion and greater meaning in life through sharing and exchanging what they possess, believe in and value with what other people have and hold dear. They can sometimes see a kind of truth or beauty in another person which somebody else might miss. Naturally other people will respond to Jupiter’s faith and openness by feeling comfortable relaxing and letting themselves go with them.
With Jupiter in Scorpio’s natural house, partnerships may be sought as a way of transcending individual boundaries and self-limitations. For Jupiter, sexual intimacy can be understood symbolically as two people merging to become something greater than what each one is individually. However, hard aspects to Jupiter can show excessive sexual appetites and a certain Don-Juan-like constant need for new experience in this area. On the other hand, I have seen difficult aspects to Jupiter in the 8th reveala person who has trouble reconciling his or her philosophical and religious beliefs with the sexual drive. Jupiter in this house may also have such high expectations of what sex should be that they are disappointed if bells don’t ring and mountains don’t move every time they make love.
In the 8th, Jupiter looks for meaning in what is hidden, taboo or mysterious and their religious and philosophical beliefs may be tinged with the metaphysical or occult. They will push open a door that others prefer to leave shut just in case the answer to life lies behind it.
Periods of breakdown and transition are usually weathered in good spirit, often bringing their innate faith and optimism to the fore. A crisis can be seen in the broader context of the whole life, and understood as a potential turning point or opportunity for change and growth. Like Peter Pan, they may believe that even to die must be a great adventure.
Jupiter in the 9th
According to myth, Zeus’ first wife was Metis, the goddess of Wisdom. She was pregnant with Athene when Zeus was warned that he would be dethroned by any child of his which Metis bore. In order to save himself, he swallowed both Metis and the unborn Athene in one gulp. As the saying goes, ‘We are what we eat’, and in this way Zeus came to embody supreme Wisdom in himself. Later on, after a splitting headache, he safely gave birth to Athene on his own and she became not only one of his favourite children but also a goddess of Wisdom in her own right.
The story offers insight into how Jupiter can best function in the 9th, his own house and the natural domain of Sagittarius. Metis, the first goddess of Wisdom, is a threat and cannot be allowed to give birth to anything. Only when she is taken back into the self – that is, digested and well thought over – can Jupiter in the 9th give birth to a greater wisdom which it is safe to love and allow to exist.
In other words, with Jupiter in the 9th, a little knowledge, not properly integrated with the rest of the personality, can be a dangerous thing. In extreme cases, some people with this placement think they know all there is to know and will justify whatever they wish to do on the basis that ‘if God didn’t want me to do it he wouldn’t have put that thought into my head.’ James Earl Ray, the assassin of Martin Luther King, was born with Jupiter in Aries in this house. The mass murderer Richard Speck (see page 142) had Jupiter in Gemini there. Jupiter in the 9th is also found in the chart of someone known as ‘the Mayfair Boy’, who robbed Cartier of London as a kind of joke. In short, those with Jupiter in its natural house may get carried away by what they think, and fanatically worship their own philosophy and beliefs as a kind of law unto themselves.
Because Zeus swallowed Wisdom, he came to embody it and those with Jupiter in the 9th also often exhibit the kind of knowledge which can attribute meaning and significance to even the most unbearable agonies they may have to endure. They will travel far and wide in search of basic laws and truths upon which to guide their pilgrimage through life. Provided they do not lock themselves up in an ivory tower of mental abstractions, they will inspire others with their vision and insight. Those with Jupiter here can journey to the furthest reaches of the mind or even into outer space but what they discover is of little use to anyone unless they come back down again and use what they have learned practically.
Along with philosophy and religion, travel and higher education will be seen as the ways of expanding awareness and finding meaning in life. It would make sense to encourage a person with this placement in any of these directions. If other aspects in the chart help to ground the Jupiter, they make excellent teachers, writers, lawyers, managers, coaches or public relations people. The Gauquelins found Jupiter on the 9th house side of the MC in the charts of successful actors who can convey experience vividly and clearly to others. Vivien Leigh, William Holden and Robert Redford were all born with Jupiter in this house. If well aspected, a beneficial rapport with in-laws is also suggested.
Jupiter in the 10th (and Sagittarius on the MC)
The ancient Greeks believed that if Zeus appeared to a mortal dressed in all his splendours and bedecked in his full array, then the poor earthling would be turned to ashes just at the sight of the god’s radiance. Similarly, those with Jupiter in the 10th want to be seen for all their power, brilliance and leadership abilities. When they step out of the house and into the public eye, they don’t intend to slip by unnoticed.
It is through career, status and recognition that they seek meaning and fulfilment in life. In some cases, fame itself is worshipped as something numinous and divine. Often they can rise to good positions in reputable professions such as law, education, banking, politics, corporate management, etc. Their careers may involve travel or international connections. Others may be actors or exponents of religion and philosophy. The choice is varied but no matter what occupation they are in, they bring with them a high degree of energy and enthusiasm, vision, insight and the capacity to organize others. They can work well with people, but probably do best if they have a fair degree of authority and a lot of room in which to manoeuvre. Usually, they are sought after for posts and will not find too many obstacles in the way to being successful. Arthur Schlesinger Jr, the historian who won two Pulitzer Prizes, was born with Jupiter in clever Gemini in the 10th. Franz Schubert, the Austrian composer, had Jupiter in musical Pisces there. Other examples of internationally successful 10th house Jupiters are Victor Hugo, the French writer noted for his humanitarian philosophy, with Jupiter in Leo in this house; the gifted sculptor Rodin, whose workThe Handsinspires us to look upward to heaven; and Herman Melville, with Jupiter in Aquarius, who led a life of travel and adventure, and epitomized the quest for God and wholeness in the hunt of the great white whale Moby Dick.
The image of the mother will be reflected by Jupiter in this house. In certain cases I have seen, she has been experienced as dramatic and theatrical, adept at manipulating others through her emotional dramas. Sometimes she has a far-reaching interest in religion and philosophy which makes her seem as if she is not really of this world. She could be foreign or from an influential or well-known family background. The child may experience and worship her as something larger than life and some daughters with this aspect may feel competition and rivalry with such a mother. On the positive side, the mother could be a source of inspiration and guidance, with helpful advice about meeting life and yet not saccharine and over-protective. With this kind of mother, the child feels confident about encountering the world and those in authority in general.
Sagittarius on the MC or contained in the 10th house is similar to Jupiter there.
Jupiter in the 11th
The god Zeus had the task of looking after the well-being of the populace. Similarly, the planet Jupiter, extending our awareness beyond the self-centred concerns of Mars,reminds us of the larger social context in which we exist and have a part to play. In this respect, Jupiter is quite at home in the 11th house.
The people prayed to Zeus for help, guidance and protection against harm, and those with this placement may be sought by friends and groups to provide the same sort of inspiration and support. Conversely, their own horizons and understanding of the meaning of life are broadened and expanded through social interaction. They may assume the role of a guru, hero or heroine in the eyes of friends or groups, or find themselves looking to a friend or group to be their protection and salvation.
Jupiter in the 11th will normally join clubs or organizations which promote humanitarian and egalitarian causes or which promise growth and expansion for everyone involved. Usually they are in tune with new currents and progressive social trends. Difficult aspects to Jupiter may indicate high expectations and ideals, and disappointment when the group fails to solve all their problems or doesn’t succeed soon enough in eliminating the woes of the world. Undismayed, however, they will move on to the next cause or organization in the hopes that a new-found formula will be the key.
Jupiter in this house suggests an ever-expanding circle of friends, often of varied cultures and nationalities. For some, life’s significance only comes to fruition if their diaries are fully booked and they are having to choose between Mick Jagger’s birthday party or an invitation to St Moritz for the weekend. Sometimes an over-involvement in social activities or too great an entanglement in the lives of their friends may dissipate their energy and detract from applying themselves in other areas of life.
Both Jupiter and the 11th house are concerned with becoming more than we already are – therefore, these people are usually not short of goals and objectives in life, and can almost always be seen looking ahead. As soon as one objective is attained, another one appears in its place. A narrowing down of goals or more discrimination in choosing which ones are worth following may be necessary if they are not to spread themselves too thinly. If they shoot their arrows too high, these may come back down on them; if they aim in too many different directions at once, they don’t know where to shoot first. It’s dizzying just watching them. However, because there is usually such a strong faith that they will and should achieve what they want, life can’t help but support them accordingly. Often, friends or groups share this faith in them and their goals, and will be helpful in their realization.
Jupiter in the 12th
The poet Hölderlin wrote that ‘where there is darkness, the saving powers also rise.’ This is one of the most important ramifications of Jupiter in the 12th – just when things seem the most hopeless and bleak, Jupiter arrives out of nowhere and salvages the situation. Those with this placement may feel as if they have a guardian angel who appears in the nick of time with a shiny new ‘get-out-of-jail-free card’.
But should we put this down just to luck and good fairies? What really sustains and rescues those with Jupiter in the 12th is a deep faith in the benevolence and significance of life, and an openness and willingness to receive whatever it has to bring them. In any house in which it is placed, Jupiter is looking for meaning in life; but in the 12th, that meaning is not found in any outer event or external reality, rather, it exists nascently within the self. Through the meaning and significance they choose to attribute to an event, those with Jupiter in the 12th can turn negative experiences into positive ones, and obstacles into blessings.
Jupiter’s house is where we are looking for the truth. In the 2nd, this may be sought in values, money or possessions and in the 7th through partnerships; but in the 12th, the truth is found within the self, on the level of the unconscious mind. A willingness to turn the attention around 180 degrees and explore the inner imaginal realm of dreams and symbols will help those with Jupiter in the 12th find the kind of truth they are seeking, and contact the inner ‘wise person’ inside each and every one of them. The breadth and scope of infinity, that bigger picture Jupiter craves to see, can be found in the vast interior recesses of the psyche – a world beyond time, space and all boundary. Meditation, stillness, prayer, retreat, music or art may be the path into that world. Imagine Jupiter’s joy when he finally arrives there.
Running around desperately hunting for their joy in all other directions, many people with this placement will look everywhere else but inside for their fulfilment. Reckless behaviour, over-indulgence in alcohol and drugs, manic theatricality, hypocrisy, general imprudence and other such negative traits may be the ‘self-undoing’ of a 12th house Jupiter.
Jupiter in the 12th can be the channel through which inspiration and healing flow and therefore those with this placement have much to offer working within hospitals, prisons and various charitable institutions. The expanded vision which dawns in times of trouble not only provides hope and inspiration for themselves but will guide others through difficulties as well. I have seen this placement in the charts of a number of gifted counsellors, psychics and healers. Flowing aspects to Jupiter in the 12th also bode well for those who are institutionalized for any reason. Benefiting from the care and protection they receive, they can turn the experience into a positive one, or else they will probably not have to stay confined for any longer than necessary.
