The Twelve Houses

24.SATURN AND CAPRICORN THROUGH THE HOUSES

Whereas Jupiter evokes a sense of expansion and optimism in the house in which it is placed, Saturn elicits almost the polar opposite experience. Rather than feeling that life is essentially benevolent and trustworthy in that area, we anticipate difficulty, disappointment and restriction in Saturn’s domain – and consequently approach this area with fear and caution. We often revel in a sense of freedom and limitless possibilities in Jupiter’s sphere, while Saturn’s domicile is where we face restrictions and boundaries and a nagging sense of duty, responsibility and the ‘oughts’ and ‘shoulds’ of life.
The old tyrant is one of the faces of Saturn. Afraid that his own children might overthrow him, Cronus (the Greek equivalent of Saturn) ate them. In this respect, Saturn’s house placement is where, due to conservatism or fear, we don’t allow our own creative impulses to have free reign. Dreading the unknown, the untried and anything new, we maintain the status quo in that area of life, even if what already exists there is not all that wonderful. Self-critic and self-effacing, we worry so much about making a wrong move in Saturn domain, that for safety’s sake, we restrict our actions severely. Like Cronus, by inhibiting, judging and censoring ourselves we devour the offspring of our own creative expression.
Cronus wielded a sickle, bringing to mind the proverb ‘as ye sow, so shall ye reap’ of which his own life is an illustration: having castrated and dethroned his father Uranus, Cronus himself was toppled later in a coup led by his own son Zeus. Similarly, in the chart, the planet Saturn represents exact and undeviating justice. We squirm and suffer if we neglect or avoid what Saturn requires; but he duly rewards us for any effort, hard work, persistence and patience we do put in. We may attempt to disguise or alleviate the pain associated with a lack of fulfilment in Saturn’s house by denying the importance of that area of life. Sooner or later, however, our sense of inadequacy or incompleteness there hits us squarely where it most hurts.
More than a tyrant, Saturn is also associated with the archetype of the Wise Old Man, a kind of Celestial Schoolteacher, who employs pain as a messenger to inform us of those aspects of ourself which need attention and development. Running away from that sphere increases rather than diminishes the discomfort; but listening to what Saturn is trying to teach or show us gradually transforms our sense of inadequacy into feelings of increasing completeness, solidity and worth. By facing Saturn’s challenge, we strengthen ourselves and are rewarded with greater knowledge and fulfilment. As a result, we later become teachers in the very area of life we have had the most difficulty mastering. The incomparable German poet Goethe (born with Saturn rising in Scorpio) grasped the true essence of this planet in a single line:In der Beschränkung zeigt sich erstder Meister:‘It is in self-limitation that a master first shows himself.’ Saturn, like a thorn in a donkey’s side, spurs us on to develop certain qualities and characteristics which we probably would not have bothered developing unless forced by internal or external pressures to do so.
The mountain goat is another symbol of Saturn and we are turned into one in the house where Saturn is found. In its laborious efforts to ascend to the top of the mountain, the goat encounters many ups and downs, but eventually it reaches its goal. Before taking each new step, the goat makes sure it has a solid footing in the one before. Positive qualities such as careful and cautious thinking, tact, perseverance and a healthy acceptance of reality, duty and responsibility are all to be found in Saturn’s terrain.
Saturn in a house is similar to having Capricorn on a cusp or contained within a house. The house where Saturn is sited will influence any house with Capricorn in it. For instance, Dr Elisabeth Kübler-Ross was born with Saturn in Scorpio in the 8th house and Capricorn on the cusp of the 11th. She is renowned for her in-depth workshops (11th) about coping with death, dying and bereavement (8th).
Saturn is a co-ruler of Aquarius and may also have an influence on any house with Aquarius in it. In Dr Kübler-Ross’ chart, Aquarius is found on the cusp of the 12th house – her pioneering work has been done primarily within hospitals and institutions. However, in general, the influence of Uranus appears to be stronger on Aquarius than Saturn.
Saturn in the 1st
Those with Saturn in the 1st house are reluctant about approaching life at all. They cautiously venture out expecting the worst and are invariably worried that they won’t meet the mark. And yet they have to challenge themselves. It’s like having a little man on their shoulders who repeatedly reprimands: ‘I’m sorry, that’s just not good enough – you know you can do better.’ They imagine that others are constantly judging and assessing them, when in actual fact it is their own self-criticism which gives the greatest problem.
Saturn in the 1st may experience the physical body itself as awkward, gross and uncomfortable. Or they feel that their personalities are inadequate and lacking in social graces. Because of their difficulty in feeling easy and relaxed, they may present themselves in an austere or withdrawn manner. Or fearing that unless they are careful they might look silly, they develop a most dignified stance and posture in all they do. Even if they appear frothy and superficial on the outside, they are likely to be masking something insecure and problematical. Others may interpret their lack of confidence and reticence as cold and unfriendly.
Usually they have (or can develop) a good sense of responsibility and a willingness to work hard in life. This may stem from a need to prove their worth to the world – a desire to receive some sort of collective validation of their ‘okay-ness’. For these reasons, they may be ambitious, exhibiting a steely determination to make something of themselves.
Very often, the early life has been experienced as difficult or restricting. They may have felt the childhood environment as unsafe or unsupportive of their free expression and personal creativity, as if they were squashed every time they stepped out of line. Others may have been lumbered with worries and responsibilities inappropriate to their young age. Later on in life, they can usually make up for the fun and spontaneity they missed as a child.
Physically, those with Saturn rising are sometimes on the lean side, and often have a distinguishing facial bone structure. If Saturn is within a few degrees of the Ascendant, the birth may have been a difficult one as if the person was actually resistingincarnation. All new phases in the life may be met with the same degree of caution, trauma and fearful expectation. And yet, if they set their goals sensibly and realistically, they usually manage to achieve their objectives in life.
Saturn in the 2nd
Saturn’s placement in the chart indicates where there is the expectation of difficulty, limitation and testing. In the 2nd, insecurity and feelings of inadequacy are experienced in the sphere of money, possessions, values and resources. Believing that their sense of worth or security cannot be provided by others, they have a pressing need to ‘make it on their own’. Even if they marry into or inherit money, they still gain greater satisfaction from what they earn themselves. As in the case of Prince Charles with Saturn in Virgo in the 2nd, some may be born into money and yet feel ‘watched’ or tested for their stewardship: that is, how wisely and effectively they put the money to use.
Although financial stress is not a very pleasant situation, sometimes it does serve as an impetus to force people to develop more of their skills and potentials than if money were no problem. I have also seen cases where those with Saturn in the 2nd accumulate an enormous amount of money and possessions and yet still feel anxious and threatened about their security. For this reason, this position of Saturn might indicate ‘the hoarder’ – everything needs to be guarded and kept in vaults for fear that it might be snatched away.
On a deeper level, those with Saturn in the 2nd are often unsure of their own innate worth and value, or lack confidence in their ability to deal effectively with the material world. Some may compensate for this by endeavouring to prove themselves through conventional outer hallmarks of success: ‘I must be okay – I’ve got a nice house in the right neighbourhood and two cars in the garage.’ Others disguise their concern about these things by belittling the importance of money and the material sphere of life in general.
The inner resources of Saturn in the 2nd are those of cautious planning, tact, perseverance and patience. Developing these qualities will prove productive. Wherever Saturn is in the chart is where we have the potential to turn difficulties into strengths. Through facing the challenges of the material world and finding their own worth and value in this way, those with Saturn in the 2nd are spurred on to greater achievements and a deeper appreciation of life in general.
One example of this placement is Guru Maharaji, who came to the United States from India at the age of fourteen. Saturn is in Sagittarius in his 2nd house and he earned his money through teaching his religion and philosophy in a foreign country (Sagittarius).
Saturn in the 3rd
One of the main issues for those with Saturn in the 3rd is expressing themselves to people in a way that can be understood. The early environment may have felt inimical or dangerous to their safety and therefore not conducive to easy and open exchanges with others. As a result, they may walk around harbouring the belief that nobody understands what they are talking about, or hold back feelings and thoughts for fear of being misinterpreted or having these used against them. They might appear shy, aloof, arrogant or stupid when really they are just uncomfortable communicating.
Such insecurities about their articulateness and intelligence have various repercussions. Compensating for a sense of inadequacy in this area, they might try toprove themselves by developing a precise and exact verbal or mental style: Saturn in the 3rd often manifests the kind of serious and orderly thought processes linked to the logical and rational left brain. Others disguise their awkwardness in 3rd house matters by becoming anti-intellectual, and putting others down who are too ‘stuck in the head’ as uptight or ‘pseudo’. They may have great difficulty making ‘small talk’ or constantly engage in babble in order to avoid revealing what is really going on inside their heads.
Whereas those with Jupiter in the 3rd operate happily and easily within the immediate environment, eager to see what waits for them around the next corner, Saturn in the 3rd limits a person’s free expression of movement. This may stem from an early childhood experience of an environment that didn’t feel safe or allow such flexibility. Sometimes they have suffered a crippling sense of restriction or loneliness while growing up. If children are kept too much in harness during certain stages of development (the primate phase) their natural curiosity and desire to explore, imitate and learn skills will be greatly diminished.1Those with Saturn in the 3rd may benefit from therapies or techniques which enable them to re-experience the early kinds of movements and mobility denied them for one reason or another.
I have seen many instances of Saturn in the 3rd where a lack of siblings gave rise to feelings of deprivation and isolation in childhood. At the same time, some people with this placement report experiencing their brothers and sisters as burdens and restrictions. In the case of those with Saturn in the 3rd being the older child, they may have been lumbered with the responsibility of looking after their younger siblings or setting a good example for them.
On the basis of any of the reasons given above, those with Saturn in the 3rd may have problems with early education and a difficult adjustment to school in general. For some, the boarding school experience may be felt as a kind of exile or banishment. There also may be delays, obstacles and challenges encountered on short journeys or travel in general. While Jupiter will just ‘pick up and go’, Saturn will want to make sure that everything is booked in advance. Jupiter arrives at a friend’s for the weekend to discover a party in full swing. Saturn comes to the same house the next weekend to discover his friend’s father has just been taken ill.
Again, the whole point of Saturn in the 3rd is not that one is condemned to a life of inarticulate misery hobbling around on crutches missing trains. Rather, this placement is an invitation to develop the potentials of a deep and steady mind, to refine the capacity to communicate more clearly with others, and to discover the kind of joy that learning about something brings. Those with Saturn well-aspected in the 3rd may naturally exhibit these traits or have fewer problems coming to terms with Saturn than others with the same placement.
Saturn in the 4th (and Capricorn on the IC)
The 4th house represents the base of operations from which we meet life: this usually means our home, but can also apply to the family background, roots and race. Saturn in this house implies difficulties and restrictions with respect to these areas.
The child with Saturn in the 4th may not have experienced his or her early environment as a very supportive place, and the atmosphere in the home may have seemed cold, unloving or depriving in some way. In certain cases I have seen, the family of origin was impoverished or struggling materially as the child was growing up. In other instances, money wasn’t the problem, but rather a lack of emotional closeness inthe family which obscured the child’s sense of belonging and well-being. One way or another, children with this placement may feel unwanted or that life is not on their side. Certain basic requirements of love and security are not being met, and consequently they begin to wonder what is wrong with them. They are hungry and not being fed or they want to be held closely and reassured of things, but nobody seems to be around when most needed. They begin to feel that they must be inadequate, flawed, or failing in some way, and their sense of who they are deep down inside is coloured by these misgivings. The ‘me’ residing inside those with Saturn in the 4th is a ‘not-good-enough-me’.
In short, for children with this placement, their sense of security or ‘okay-ness’ is not easily found from outer sources. Instead, they will have to discover their own strength, solidity, support and lovableness from within themselves. If this is achieved, then Saturn in the 4th is truly a blessing in disguise: because once we establish our sense of value and worth from within, then the outside world can never take that away from us. This is the precious gift of a 4th house Saturn.
In general, there is trouble with the father. Sometimes, he is not around at all. In other cases, he is physically there but psychologically absent. He might be experienced as cold, conventional, critical, materialistic and rigid or a burden and responsibility due to ill health, personal problems, etc. Children with this placement may feel that they have failed the father in some way, or what’s worse, that they have transgressed not just him, but the whole family, race and background, and even God as well. They grow up not only with a nagging sense of guilt that they are not good enough, but also with a great deal of suppressed anger and resentment directed at those they feel are unappreciative and judging of them. Untangling this kind of knot is never easy and will take a long time, if done at all. A major step is achieved when they ask themselves ‘What do I really need?’ They may find that this is not all that dissimilar to what they believed the harsh parent was trying to shove down their throats. Or once they discover what it is they need, they can proceed to build it in or provide it for themselves and let the depriving father or whoever off the hook for not giving it to them. More positively, a well-placed Saturn in the 4th could indicate a father who models qualities of strength, depth, patience and a common sense adaptation to the rigours and joys of the material world.
Those with Saturn in the 4th are in a tricky position. They often feel deeply inadequate and mistrusting of others and yet they yearn for something permanent and stable in their life. Some may compensate for their sense of insecurity by acquiring land or property. On a more mundane level, Saturn in the 4th suggests duties and responsibilities in the domestic sphere and problems setting up a home. As usual, wherever Saturn is, hard work, persistence and making the most even of a limited situation pay off in the end.
People with this placement may take a long time to establish their inner strength and identity, but once found, it is solid and enduring. In doing the charts of older people with Saturn in this house, I have observed that in the second half of life they often discover what they feel is their true work or mission and pursue a project or study with great commitment.
Capricorn on the IC is similar in many respects to Saturn in the 4th. The life is built on a deep need for stability and the search for an authentic sense of their self-worth, purpose and value. Looking for these things from the outside may prove uncertain and disappointing.

Saturn in the 5th
While Mars and Jupiter rush into the sandbox to get started on their castles, Saturn in the 5th hesitantly steps into it with a worried look on his face. ‘What if my castle is no good? I’m sure other people won’t like it at all. Do I have to do one? I really should – all the other kids are. Everyone really liked Johnny’s castle, maybe I’d better do one just like that?’ Meanwhile Mars has finished his and Jupiter’s is nearly done (it’s bigger than Mars’). Saturn is still ruminating: ‘Is this the best shovel to use? What are the basic principles of sandcastle building? I must get everything organized first.’ Jupiter and Mars have now left the sandbox and are playing on the swings as the sun sets on Saturn firmly fixing the foundation of his castle into place …
Later in life, those with Saturn in the 5th have the same difficulty freely expressing their individuality and personal creativity. They desperately want to be loved for their specialness and originality and yet feel that it is precisely their differentness which will put others off. What’s gone wrong?
For one reason or another, they have had ‘the playful child’ inside them rebuffed. The psychologist Karen Horney believes that in the same way a pear seed develops into a pear, human beings naturally grow into their intrinsic potential provided various adverse circumstances don’t stand in the way of this happening. Very often, however, children only feel loved and acceptable when they are living up to what their parents desire them to be. Rather than risk revealing who they are in themselves, they will hide their own uniqueness for the sake of conforming to their parents’ expectations. Their energy is then directed into this image of what they should be, rather than freely unfolding in its own right. A kind of alienation from the real self occurs and the spontaneous flow of the self is blocked by rigidity, doubt and insecurity. They end up watching themselves watching themselves, while their real light stays hidden behind a cloud. The discrepancy between their real selves and their contrived identities leaves them unhappy and uncertain with what they produce. Ultimately the challenge of Saturn in this position is to find ways to free their trapped creative spirit. Mother and Father are no longer there watching over them. What those with Saturn in the 5th need to do is to give themselves permission to allow the spontaneous and playful child hidden inside to come out once in a while.
Often they lack hobbies and spare-time amusements which would serve to add that extra something to the enjoyment of life and through which their individuality is further defined. Similarly, they are insecure in affairs of the heart: romance adds spice to life and makes us feel important and special, and yet those with Saturn in the 5th aren’t sure enough of themselves to enjoy fully a piece of the cake. Afraid of rejection, they are too guarded and fearful of looking silly to feel relaxed in these situations. For Saturn in the 5th, having fun is hard work.
They also fear that what they give birth to will be unacceptable. Hence, this placement is often associated with a reluctance to have children, or problems with offspring. They may fear that their children won’t like them or, conversely, that they won’t like their children. The tests and restrictions imposed by raising children will be strongly felt with this placement so it is probably wise if they plan carefully the timing of when to start a family. It is likely that they will learn as much from their children as their children learn from them.
Curiously, I have done charts for quite a few professional artists and actors who have Saturn in this position – as if they must make work out of creative expression. Othersmay have careers in the organization or administration of the arts, or in professions which deal with children or young people.
Saturn in the 6th
This position normally confers organizational and administrative ability as well as the capacity to pay close attention to detail. At the same time, a compulsive need to order the environment in this way may denote some deeper fears and a mistrust of life which ought to be acknowledged and examined.
With this placement, daily life and its routine requirements can be felt as oppressive and exceptionally demanding. Managing mundane affairs such as paying the electricity bill, running the car and keeping the flat tidy may become as complex and pressing as planning the execution of a major military strategy. They need routine and ritual and yet there is the danger of being frustrated and trapped by the structures they create.
Issues arise in the area of health and the efficient functioning of the body. For some, health problems curtail or limit individual freedom – such as special diets or certain physical exertions which must be restricted lest disastrous consequences ensue. With Saturn in the 6th, symptoms of ill health should be examined as symbols or messages forcing themselves into the awareness, offering awakening and change. The body concretizes the system’s imbalances in the form of illness and disease in an attempt to show us where there is something awry happening in the whole pattern of the life. Particular health problems may come through Saturnine areas – the skin, bones, knees and joints. Some medical and health practitioners have observed that those people who want to do something but continually hold themselves back (Saturn) may be the ones most prone to arthritis and rheumatism. In some cases, Parkinson’s disease has been tracked back to suppressed fear, another Saturnine trait. Those with Saturn in this house can participate in their health not only in direct ways such as diet and exercise, but also through adjusting and examining overly rigid or fearful psychological attitudes. If these challenges are met, they will grow not only stronger, but also much wiser. This placement might also describe ‘health freaks’ who are exceptionally cautious about what they eat or take into their bodies. Some may make a career in the health or healing professions.
With a difficultly aspected Saturn, problems could arise in the area of work. There can be over-criticism of those with whom they work, or a fear of being unacceptable or inadequate in the eyes of co-workers or bosses. Shadowy and unintegrated parts of their own psyches can be projected onto those they meet at work or people they employ to do various jobs for them. Those with Saturn in the 6th find their place in the scheme of things by developing and fine-tuning their marketable skills and abilities. This will not necessarily come without dedication and effort or a menial and humble apprenticeship.
Although it may sound trivial, their relationship to pets and small animals may assume some importance with this placement. The death or loss of their trusty dog or beloved cat can open up a Pandora’s box of psychological and philosophical issues.
Saturn in the 7th
Relationships are not that easy for people with Saturn in the 7th and yet this is precisely the area through which they will be challenged to grow and examine themselves. Trying to wriggle out of the hot seat, they might complain that the right man or woman has just never come along, or moan that some flaw in the partner is the root of thetrouble. However, rather than just blaming fate, bad luck or poor choice it is by searching inwards that they will unearth reasons for the dispiriting state of affairs.
Wherever there is Saturn, there is fear. Very often these people obstruct relationships because they are frightened of becoming too deeply involved with others. They may be afraid of the degree of commitment a relationship requires, and terrified of becoming too dependent on someone else. Dreading and half-expecting to be hurt, they cannot risk the vulnerability of true intimacy. As is often the case with the 7th house, in order to trace the origins of these kinds of complexes, earlier relationships will have to be examined.
Did they open to a parent and then experience hurt, rejection and misunderstanding? If so, they may still anticipate being unlovable or unacceptable to others. Was the parental marriage so atrocious as to obliterate the very idea of a happy union? If so, can they not learn from their parents’ mistakes? By seeking answers and solutions to these kinds of questions, they grow wiser about themselves, relationships and life in general. This is the gift of Saturn in the 7th.
I have seen many instances of people with Saturn in the 7th house who complain that their partners are too limiting and restricting – if only it weren’t for their spouses, they would accomplish so much more. Sometimes this is true because they have chosen, unconsciously or not, ostensibly tyrannical men or women as partners. However, the belief that the partner is holding them back is a form of self-deception: in actual fact, what they have done is to project their own internal blocks and fears of stretching themselves onto the partner. Even when they are free of their supposedly restraining husbands and wives, many of those people with Saturn in the 7th will just find other reasons for not venturing forth and expanding themselves. Why not examine these inner obstacles first?
Saturn in the 7th may look for a partner who is safe. Sometimes the least risky ones are those who do not engender an enormous amount of passion. Or as a kind of self-protection policy, they may deliberately choose partners whom they feel are inadequate or lacking in certain respects. Therefore, if the relationship fails, and the other person walks out the door, they can reassure themselves that they are better off without that no-good lame duck. Others seem to select partners who have the same weaknesses as they do, and then proceed to batter the other person for those things they feel unhappy about in themselves.
Saturn in this house also manifests in the search for a partner who will provide security and stability for them. For these reasons, this placement has often been associated with marriage to an older person, or a mother-figure or father-figure. This may work, but at the expense of keeping them small and dependent. Should it fail, it may be a blessing in disguise because they are forced to develop their own inner source of strength and support. While this is not easy, it is invariably a worthwhile achievement.
Saturn in the 7th may marry later in life or not find more complete fulfilment in a union until somewhat older – as if Father Time must teach them a thing or two before a truly mutual and healthy relationship can be formed.
More mundanely, lawsuits may be long and drawn out, and it might be advisable to try to settle out of court.

Saturn in the 8th
Saturn in the 8th gives apprehensions and difficulties in the area of intimacy, sharing and joint resources. They may feel insecure about what they have to give or experience some difficulty receiving what another is offering. More generally, there is the fear of letting go, of merging and blending with another person. To truly merge with someone else means the death of the self as a separate individual. This is a frightening prospect for those with Saturn in the 8th who want to hold onto what they value and possess. In addition, letting themselves go in a relationship entails the possibility of being overtaken by feelings that they have attempted to keep under rigid control – rage, jealousy, envy and passions of a primitive and instinctive nature. They desperately crave a close union and yet withdraw from it for fear of being overwhelmed by such eruptions. Subsequently they may have difficulty relaxing and being open and trusting with others, all of which could give rise to sexual problems. (In mythology, Eros and Thanatos were brothers and the sexual union is a kind of death of one’s individuality.) Investigating the root causes of inhibitions in this area deepens and enriches their self-knowledge and understanding.
Besides possible sexual hang-ups, there are conflicts pooling resources and making personal adjustments in relationships. The partner’s beliefs or values may differ from and contradict their own, or they may choose a mate who is a burden in some way. And yet, helping out with the welfare of others may be precisely what Saturn in the 8th needs for their own personal development. There can be trouble over inheritance, taxation and business contracts, and the possibility of drawn-out divorce proceedings. Some will make a career dealing with other people’s money – bankers, investment consultants, stockbrokers and accountants may have this position of Saturn.
Generally, they hesitate to probe beneath the surface of life and yet this is what is needed for greater depth and maturity. Obviously, people who attempt to maintain rigid controls over themselves are likely to be very frightened by the prospect of physical death and what looms in the hereafter. These apprehensions could provoke them to a serious pursuit of more knowledge in these areas. A supreme example is found in the chart of Dr Elisabeth Kübler-Ross, with Saturn in Scorpio in the 8th: through her pioneering research she has helped thousands face death with nobility and peace.
Saturn in the 9th
Those with this placement encounter the serious, methodical, conservative and apprehensive Saturn in the sphere of religion, philosophy, higher education and travel. Usually they have an interest in religion and philosophy and the need to find definite answers to basic questions concerning the meaning and patterning of existence. Unlike Jupiter here, who can justify almost anything he wants to do, with Saturn in this house the sense of the divine is tinged by the attributes of the old tyrant himself – God is judgemental, stern and liable to punish them for the slightest mistake. Often they have been brought up under the yoke of conventional or orthodox forms of religion, and their ‘spiritual superego’ is very strong and inhibitive. Saturn in the 9th may feel that what God likes and dislikes is clearly defined, and that there are strict rules and laws which designate how life should be lived. To transgress these spells disaster. Consequently their philosophy is practical and utilitarian. Some may be caught in the outward trappings of religion, obsessed with observing the exact letter of the law, and forgetful of the inner meaning behind these forms.
Conversely, there are some people with Saturn in this house who are so frightened of anything which smacks of universality or bigger principles that they hide behind sceptical and cynical attitudes. They will believe only in that which can be seen, tested and proven. Others may undertake serious studies of philosophy, theology or metaphysics in an attempt to concretize, specify and ‘pin down’ higher truths. The Gauquelins found this placement in the charts of successful scientists, who literally make a career of ‘knowing’ and classifying the laws and principles which govern life.
While those with Saturn in the 9th may fear that they are not good enough for God, they also worry that God is not doing His job very adequately, and could try to take up the burden. (They might also experience similar kinds of feelings about their in-laws.)
Saturn in this house can also give rise to what Erica Jong called ‘the fear of flying’. While Jupiter in the 9th is ruminating about all the things he can and will do, Saturn here is frightened of its own potentials and afraid of taking risks. For those with this placement, every time they lift their arms to reach for the sky they feel a cramp. Such negative expectations do not augur well for the success of such ventures. And yet, slowly and with persistence, they can sort through the doubts and hesitations and arrive there in the end – sometimes even before Jupiter, who has changed his mind and veered off in another direction entirely.
Correspondingly, on a mundane level, Saturn in the 9th will encounter some difficulties or feel uncomfortable with a great deal of travel. Some may reside abroad out of necessity or travel in connection with their work, but their idea of fun is usually not wandering around the world seeing what will happen next. They find it much more reassuring to have the future planned. Ironically, however, those times when the diary is empty and they have to trust and believe in whatever the next day brings may be their most opportune periods of breakthrough and growth.
Saturn in the 10th (and Capricorn on the MC)
In his own home and elevated by position, Saturn operates powerfully in the 10th. Whether they acknowledge it or not, these people are extremely sensitive about how other people see them. Saturn in the 10th, like the personal ego itself, wants to be seen as strong, solid and enduring. Success is normally judged in terms of traditional values and roles – the career status, the kind of house they own, the respectability of the marriage, etc. Usually (and there are exceptions) there is the need to achieve position and recognition through some sort of work which is socially acceptable. They may be judgemental and condemning of others who venture to live outside of that which ‘straight’ society validates. If they must constrict themselves, why shouldn’t others – and they may be both envious and angry at those who don’t.
They will probably have to work hard to achieve the respect and status they want. If well-aspected, they can realize their career aims through dedication and logical step-by-step progression up the ladder. However, if Saturn is difficultly placed, there may be many delays and obstacles along the way. Some may feel that any means justifies winning their ends – thereby compromising themselves or using others for their own gain. They may reach a certain plateau, and then feel stuck and thwarted in their efforts to go further. Others may rise fairly quickly, misuse their power, and then topple just as fast. We usually land on our feet in Jupiter’s house, but in Saturn’s domain we may be brought down to our knees if we aren’t careful. A contemporary example of a 10th house Saturn is John Mitchell, one of Nixon’s cabinet, who was indicted and sent toprison for his part in the Watergate affair. Famous historical examples of this placement of Saturn include Hitler and Napoleon.
Some people with Saturn in the 10th may actually rebel against their over-sensitivity to society’s codes and values by trying to break the rules. (We mustn’t forget that Cronus started out in life by transgressing the existing authority, i.e. his father.) A case in point is seen in the chart of Nathan Leopold, born with Saturn in Aquarius in the 10th, whose story was related in a book and film entitledCompulsion.Although he came from a wealthy and respectable family, his compulsion was to commit the perfect crime. Together with his friend Richard Loeb he carefully planned the sadistic murder of an innocent young boy. Like the hero of Dostoevsky’sCrime and Punishment,Leopold challenged the restraints of Saturn and society in an attempt to prove that he was above the law. Because of the pressure of social propriety that they feel, those with Saturn in the 10th may do all they can to kick against it. Bob Dylan summed up this placement nicely in a song with these words: ‘To live outside the law you must be honest.’ Or, as the saying has it, ‘Liberty is the luxury of discipline.’
And of course there is the mother: with Saturn in this house, she is often experienced as a strict socializing force, the law-giver who decides what is acceptable and proper. Children with this placement may internalize her rules or later believe that the kind of obedience Mother wanted is the same that should be given to society. The mother may be felt as critical, cold, demanding and unloving. Whatever the child does is never good enough. Or the mother may seem more like a burden and responsibility – someone the child has to care for, rather than the more usual way around. On a more hopeful note, the mother could serve as a model of positive Saturnine qualities, exemplifying patience, discipline, durability, pragmatism and determination.
Saturn in the 10th is similar to Capricorn on the MC. Those with this planet or sign there are often excellent organizers and administrators, executives, managers, scientists, builders and teachers.
Saturn in the 11th
Saturn is by nature ambivalent about the main thrust of the 11th – the urge to become more than we already are. On the one hand, Saturn is attracted by the lure of anything which offers greater security and prestige; on the other hand, he is terrified at the thought of having to open up and expand his carefully guarded boundaries.
While those with Saturn in the 11th may experience a pressing need to join with others and be part of a group or circle of friends, they often feel awkward or threatened in such situations. Some may react accordingly by avoiding these kinds of social contacts, and yet, in doing so, forfeit the opportunity to grow and learn in this important area of life.
Even if they only form a few carefully selected friendships, somehow problems still arise. Friends may be the catalyst through which they have to face issues which are most challenging for them. For example, one man I know with Saturn in the 11th loves to flirt with any woman he meets and yet he invariably chooses friends who are very possessive about their wives. As friend after friend broke off their association with him, the man in question was forced to reflect on the causes and reasons for his compulsive behaviour. He could blame his friends for being such jealous types, but why did he repeatedly set up the same situation, and what was this fatal fascination for married women all about anyway?
People with Saturn in the 11th will usually have to work hard at developing those qualities which earn a person the ‘good friend’ label. Unlike the example above, some may be too rigid and formal with a friend, as if they are afraid of putting a foot wrong or being taken advantage of by an associate. Sometimes friends can be felt as a burden, restriction or responsibility. They may worry that a friend will reject or criticize them; or they, themselves, might be the ones who feel cold and judgemental at times. They sometimes choose older or more mature associates who have had greater experience in this area and can serve as models or teachers for how to behave. Or Saturn in the 11th may suffer a sense of loneliness and isolation because of a lack of companions. However, if difficulties are faced and examined, Saturn in this house has the capacity for loyal and enduring friendships.
Similar experiences can occur in groups, clubs or organizations. Although those with Saturn in the 11th don’t always feel easy in group situations, this is precisely where they can learn the most about themselves and others. They might belong to a group which limits or restricts their freedom in some way or they may assume heavy duties and administrative responsibilities within a club or organization. Whereas Saturn in the 5th needs the permission to be different, a difficultly aspected 11th house Saturn needs lessons in how to work jointly with other people. What is their place and purpose in the human family? How can they promote the growth and evolution of society in some way?
Some with this placement may be trapped by their own rigid ideals of what they should be. Others might be afraid to commit themselves to any particular goal, feeling that this would be too binding or limiting. At times, frustrated by blocks to their progress, they will want to give up entirely. While it’s wise to periodically review, reassess and even re-choose our objectives in life, Saturn in the 11th shouldn’t forget their mascot, the goat – who reaches his goal by patiently and persistently taking little steps at a time. He isn’t an overnight success, but he arrives there in the end.
Saturn in the 12th
Like those with Saturn in the 8th, people with Saturn in the 12th are often afraid of what lurks beneath the surface level of consciousness. Should they relax their controls over themselves, they fear that they might be engulfed by overwhelming emotions.
The neo-Freudians believe that in the name of security and social adaptability, we repress certain drives, impulses and appetites which others (or our own egos) would find unacceptable. But some with Saturn in the 12th go a step further. In divorcing themselves from what is in the unconscious, they also inhibit a very positive and pressing desire which exists in all of us: the urge to reconnect to our at-one-ness with the rest of life. Instead of experiencing joy at the prospect of merging with something greater than the self, they recoil in horror at the thought of dissolution of their individuality. Robert Desoille, a French psychotherapist, coined a term for this, calling it ‘the repression of the sublime’.
In certain cases, they suffer a type of guilt or despair – something inside tells them that they are not all they could be. Or they are beset by paranoia, a feeling that someone or something is out to destroy them. Traditional textbooks interpret Saturn in the 12th as ‘undoing by secret enemies’; but more often than not, the enemy is an aspect of their own unconscious selves, angry with them for having been brushed aside. When they make friends with what they have rejected, a sense of peace settles over the psyche, and they rest more easily at night. If they don’t reconcile themselves with parts ofthemselves they have denied, then they protect themselves against invasion by double-locking their doors, keeping to themselves, and remembering to forget their dreams.
Deep psychological fears which are difficult to trace may contribute to a pervading sense of self-doubt and lack of confidence. Sometimes their problems may stem from pre-natal difficulties. The womb is a place where we are meant to swim in a sense of the totality of life. If for any reason those waters were troubled, then we may later resist anything which resembles that kind of experience. It may be worthwhile for those with Saturn in the 12th to investigate what the gestation period might have been like. Perhaps the mother wasn’t sure about having a child at that time. Or she could have been worried about money or the state of affairs with the father. For whatever reasons, the developing embryo, through the umbilical connection, registers that life is not all right. The child grows up vaguely anxious about almost everything, guilty about being alive, and in poor relation to the rest of life.
Either due to this sense of guilt or partly motivated by an innate feeling of being responsible for other people’s problems, they may feel that they owe a debt to society which can be paid off through service. They sometimes work in hospitals, prisons, charities or governmental agencies dealing in any number of ways with those in trouble or need. Others with Saturn in the 12th may live out their all-pervading sense of unacceptability behind bars or hidden away in a hospital ward.
Some with Saturn in this house are terrified of intimacy. This could stem from a fear of being engulfed, or a dread of losing their identity as a separate individual. They may believe that they can only maintain their autonomy by withdrawing from people. Or they fear that no matter what they do, all things will come to a bad end. Thus, they shun attachment or commitment to people or things. This underlying sense of futility needs to be brought to the surface and explored. Until they do this, they may fear the whole realm of emotions and feelings (12th house) and take refuge by living mainly ‘in their heads’.
Any principle in the 12th house can sustain us or undo us. Positive Saturn qualities such as recognizing their natural limits, the acceptance of duty and responsibility, and plain common sense may help them through difficult situations. Some exhibit a deep inner wisdom which can guide them through the most difficult times. However, too great a sense of separateness from the rest of life, an overly materialistic outlook, or a refusal to examine psychological problems could be the cause of pain and suffering. Sometimes there is a voluntary withdrawal from activity or a compelling need for privacy and seclusion to recollect the pieces of the self which have been shattered by a stressful encounter with life. At times, they may be driven to seek the support or aid of caring agencies or turn to ‘something up there’ for help. As hard as this might be, a crisis which precipitates their asking others for help may enable them to discover that they are not as alone in the world as they believed. The German poet Goethe, born with Saturn in Scorpio in the 12th, lyrically expressed a similar sentiment when he wrote: ‘Who never ate his bread with tears, who never sat through the sorrowful night, weeping on his bed, does not know … heavenly powers.’
In conclusion, Saturn in the 12th asks that the whole realm of the unconscious be taken seriously. Those with this placement may be afraid to explore these waters and yet this is precisely what they need to do. Should they overcome their fears and embark on the path of psychological self-investigation, their efforts will be amply rewarded. They will not only reconnect to severed parts of themselves but regain a lost sense of relatedness to the rest of life in the process.

A Note on the Outer Planets in the Houses
In whatever houses they are placed, the three outer planets – Uranus, Neptune and Pluto – bring experiences of a more disruptive, radical and transforming nature than the other planets which might occupy that sphere. Rather than just living the affairs of the house in an ordinary, routine or uncomplicated way, we are somehow catapulted into a more complex relationship with that dimension of life.
Saturn, by house, makes us aware of what is weak, inadequate or incomplete in ourselves and in this way highlights those areas which we need to work on and strengthen. However, the outer planets go a step further by periodically challenging the very existence and viability of the kinds of structures which we have created in the spheres of the chart where they are found. Besides complicating the affairs of the house, they symbolize certain kinds of conflicts, paradoxes, tensions and traumas which cry out for some sort of major change or shift on our part whether we like it or not. Hopefully we break down in order to break through – and the end result is a broadened, deepened, refined and expanded awareness of ourselves and life in general.
The sign positions of the outer planets remain the same for all people over long durations of time. Therefore, the more personal influences of Uranus, Neptune and Pluto are shown by the houses in which they are placed.
Notes – Chapter 241. Jean Houston,The Possible Human, L. P. Tarcher, Los Angeles, California, 1982, p. 101.

