The Twelve Houses

25.URANUS AND AQUARIUS THROUGH THE HOUSES

Not a great deal is written about Uranus in mythology. The first sky-god, he ruled the limitless expanse of space and had the job of inventing and designing Nature. He accomplished such creative feats as fashioning the wings of butterflies, each one stamped with its own uniqueness and individuality. By house, Uranus in the chart is where we are capable of fresh and original thought and action. In his domain, it is not necessary to conform to traditional and conventional patterns of behaviour.
He was married to Gaea, Mother Earth. Every night the Sky lay down on the Earth, and as a result they kept conceiving children. The prolific couple gave birth to the race of giants known as the Titans; to a few one-eyed Cyclopses; and a host of other monsters each with one hundred arms and fifty heads. Disgusted at the sight of his own offspring, Uranus refused to allow them to exist. Instead, as soon as they were born, he shoved them back into Gaea’s womb, the very bowels of the Earth itself. Astrologically this implies that in Uranus’ house, we may conceive what we believe are some very good ideas, but when acted upon and concretized, they may not turn out so well. What in theory seemed highly desirable can in actual fact disappoint us when put into practice. And like the god Uranus, we sometimes have to bury our original ideas and try again.
Obviously, Gaea, her womb gorged with these banished children, was not amused. Reaching into her bosom, she produced some steel, fashioned a sickle, and then implored her children to castrate their father with it. Her youngest son Cronus (Saturn), already exhibiting a well-developed sense of responsibility, volunteered to undertake the task. Some of the blood from Uranus’ dismembered phallus spurted back into Gaea’s womb and gave birth to the Furies. When the organ was cast into the sea, it merged with the foam and Aphrodite (Venus) was born.
This myth suggests the complexities which characterize Uranus’ sphere of influence. That part of us which is more earthy or Saturnian – our reserve, caution, conservatism, respect for tradition, and fear of the unknown – can literally ‘cut off’ the creative impulse of Uranus. The inhibition of Uranus in a house can give birth to the Furies, whose names translate into ‘envious anger’, ‘retaliation’, and ‘never-endingness’.1If we cling too long to old and outworn ‘scripts’ and patterns of behaviour in Uranus’ domain, then the Furies will pursue us. Resenting the state of affairs in that area of life, we often blame others for our unhappiness, causing a poisonous and bitter residue to build up in the psyche. An awesome amount of energy is required to hold back a change when it is really needed, and we may end up exhausted, diseased or alienated as a result. Or, perhaps we courageously undertake the new action and explore other provocative and independent ways of being in that house. Even so, we may still evoke the Furies – this time unleashed on us by those who feel challenged, transgressed and threatened by our behaviour. On either a personal or collective level, Uranus’ house is where we may have to deviate from conformity, experiment with new trends or currents of thought, and risk disrupting ourselves and everything around us in the name of progress and evolution.
Thankfully, Aphrodite is also born out of this struggle. Her presence suggests that while respecting and working within some of the limits and confines of Saturn, we can attempt to find the most harmonious and creative ways (Venus) to bring forth new life. In some cases, we may not be able to totally overthrow the old structures, but we can endeavour to make room within these for new ideas and interests, and in this way give some sort of expression to change. This is the challenge Uranus presents in the area of the chart he inhabits.
Uranus was discovered relatively recently in 1781, during the period of the American and French Revolutions, and on the eve of the Industrial Revolution. Synchronously, this planet is associated with ideals of truth, justice, liberty, fraternity and equality as well as any progressive collective trends which challenge the status quo. Uranus wants us to transcend the limits of our past, our background, our biology and if possible our fate: just because we are born into a poor family doesn’t mean that we have to be a peasant. In pure form, its vision is of many individuals grouped together, each expressing his or her own uniqueness and yet supporting the larger whole of which each is a part.
However, Uranus is prone to certain distortions. By house, it is where we have a need for truth and freedom as well as an inordinate fear of being trapped or imprisoned by our own creations. If we are too attached to change for the sake of change, then nothing will ever take root in this area. Or wavering on that fine line between madness, eccentricity and genius, we may persistently feel the need to be different for no other motive than causing some disruption or drawing attention to ourselves. Uranus’ house may show where we rashly disrespect the limits of our ‘human-ness’. Presuming we can automatically transcend the restrictions of the physical body or rise above the instinctual components of our nature, we commit the sin ofhubrisand invite punishment to fall on us. With the same finesse that inspired Dr Frankenstein to make his monster, we unleash horrors on the world in the name of advancement and progress. Or when utopian ideals (as in the French Revolution) don’t take into account the realities of human nature, they convolute and turn in on themselves, sometimes strangling almost everyone in the process.
Aquarius on the cusp or contained within a house will have a similar flavour to Uranus there. There will be a connection between the house containing Uranus and any house with Aquarius in it.
Uranus in the 1st
Those with Uranus in the 1st best meet life by having the courage to determine their own truths for themselves. If there is no path, they should make one. Highly original and inventive, they offer new insights or ideas into their various fields of interests. Alexander Graham Bell who patented the telephone was born with Uranus in Aries in the 1st. Mary Baker Eddy, the founder of the Christian Science Church and the only woman to ever establish a religion, was born with Uranus in Capricorn in this house. Nikola Tesla, a Yugoslavian-born scientist and inventor whose life is recounted in a book calledThe Prodigal Genius, had Uranus in Taurus in the 1st. Traditionally, Uranus is associated with electricity, and Tesla was the first man to effectively utilize the alternating current. Obviously, those with Uranus in the 1st are better in leadership roles – they just can’t cope very well being followers. Nor should they, with the highly individualistic Uranus in the natural house of Aries and Mars.
Talk about electricity – they usually have it. Often this can be seen in their eyes, face or around their hair – something about them crackles and buzzes. If Uranus is difficultly aspected, they can be extremely obstinate and unreasonably dissenting, revelling in being different simply for the sake of it.
Nonetheless, they must be given a great deal of personal freedom to find themselves. Most of us derive our sense of who we are from being somebody’s wife, mother, child, boss, lover, etc. However, for those with Uranus in the 1st, these traditional collective representations of identity are just not enough. There is always something better or different that they could be and therefore they have great difficulty settling into any one definite sense of who they are. Others may find this wonderfully exciting or painfully irritating.
Basically, they just want to be left alone to get on with what they want to do without people bothering them. It’s no use trying to stop them anyway. Unwilling to adhere to conventional forms or standards of behaviour, they ‘cut through’ anything which is phoney or stifling with laser-like alacrity. To others, they sometimes appear shocking.
If Uranus is close to the Ascendant, there may be something unusual about the birth or early upbringing. One extreme case which Lois Rodden (inAstro-Data II: TheAmerican Book of Charts) cites is a Brazilian boy with Uranus in Virgo in the 1st and much of Aquarius in the 6th house: he was born with two heads, each of which ate and breathed separately. I also know of a child born with Uranus in the 1st house on the Ascendant who was taken away from his teenage mother one day after birth and put up for adoption. One way or another with Uranus in the 1st, life is not going to be ordinary.
Uranus in the 2nd
Those with Uranus in the 2nd will have to approach the whole area of money, possessions and resources in a different way from the ordinary. This position represents a challenge to rise above the collective’s traditional value systems and the more usual ways of viewing the material world. Not wishing to be bound by the need for material security and possessions, some may shun attachment to those very things which most people are seeking. If valued at all, money will be appreciated for the freedom it offers them to pursue what itisthey really want to do.
Sometimes there may be unusual ways of earning money or the income can be gained from newly developing fields, modern technologies, or some highly individualistic endeavour. Some people with this placement may support more radical economic or political systems which organize the distribution of wealth differently from their native regime. Uranus in this house is also associated with sudden material and financial ups and downs. Intuitively acting on a hunch, they may take risks with money. Depending on the aspects to Uranus, these may ‘pay off’ admirably or land the person penniless.
Those with Uranus in the 2nd often experience some sort of change, disruption or de-structuring in the area of personal security which forces them to re-evaluate this whole sphere of life. For instance, even if they are trying to pursue a more orderly or conventional approach to the material world, they may find themselves the victim of some larger collective influence or upheaval which disrupts their source of income or security. The company they work for may do a re-shuffle, or due to a recession they find themselves on the redundancy list. Or for reasons beyond their control, they have to flee their country of residence, leaving everything behind to face the prospect of startinganew. At some time in their lives, they might have to develop different skills, unlike those which they have previously used, to support themselves.
Very often, it is their own strong unconscious urges which coerce them to break with past attachments. If they are unconscious of their deep need for freedom, they may choose situations which they believe offer security but which ultimately turn out to be unstable. (In any battle between conscious desires and unconscious ones, the unconscious usually wins.) Some may believe in the principle of ‘mind over matter’: that there is a higher plane which can affect and shape the happenings on the material level of existence.
The innate resources which should be developed are those of originality, inventiveness, openness to new currents and progressive trends, and an often crystal-clear insight into situations. It may be that those with Uranus in the natural house of Taurus canmaterializetheir ‘genius’ more easily than when this planet is in other houses. For example, Yehudi Menuhin, who was giving public recitals from the age of seven, earned his money through his musical genius (Uranus in Aquarius in the 2nd). Guglielmo Marconi, the inventor of the wireless and radio magnetic detector, was born with Uranus in Leo in this house. Michelangelo, ‘the universal genius’, is reputed to have had Aquarius on the 2nd house cusp.
Uranus in the 3rd
Those with Uranus in the 3rd keep looking for their own ways to understand what happens around them, rather than adhering to how they have been educated to see things. In other words, they are inventive, original and intuitive thinkers. The Uranian mind grasps concepts whole, and has revelations and sudden insights into life, people, events and situations. Somehow they perceive the environment from a slightly different angle to others. Very often they exhibit a kind of detached clarity which enables them to solve problems quickly. While others are grappling with solutions and establishing research projects to comprehend an issue more fully, Uranus appears on the scene and immediately knows the answer – ‘It’s obvious, you ought to try it this way.’ A more rational and logical mind will be baffled by the Uranian ability to ‘pull answers out of the air’. Sometimes, their ideas are slightly ahead of their time. Others simply will not be able to fathom them immediately. But days, months or years later they begin to understand what Uranus had computed instantly and naturally. It won’t come as a surprise to learn that Albert Einstein was born with Uranus in the 3rd ruling Aquarius on the 9th (the house associated with the laws and principles which govern existence).
People with Uranus in the 3rd may be restless and highly strung. They need to move around, explore and experience a wide variety of life’s facets. Their minds may change course so quickly that others are left totally confused about what is happening. They are mental gymnasts: it appears that they are changing the subject or talking innon sequiturswhen actually they have made a quick connection between one topic and another, which a slower-thinking mind may fail to perceive. Uranus’ thinking is often non-linear or ‘lateral’.
Uranus in the 3rd can describe a disruptive early environment, possibly one in which significant changes in residence produced upheaval for the person. Even at an early age, they may have felt separate or different from others in the immediate environment. The relationships with siblings may be unusual, as in the case of blended families – where there are step-sisters or brothers from a previous marriage of one or both the parents. Ihave seen this placement in the charts of people who are considerably older or younger than the other siblings. A brother, sister, aunt, uncle, etc., may exhibit obvious Uranian characteristics.
Uranus in the 3rd might have a hard time adjusting to traditional educational systems. Any course of study may be subject to some chopping and changing. Often, they make highly original contributions to any branch of learning, and I have seen this placement in the charts of individuals who stand out in the fields of education and communication.
The 3rd house rules short journeys, and with Uranus here, unexpected happenings are to be expected. My favourite example of someone who travels fromAtoBin the most unusual ways is the daredevil Evel Knievel, with Uranus in the 3rd ruling Aquarius on the Ascendant.
Uranus in the 4th (and Aquarius on the IC)
Dane Rudhyar writes of Uranus in the 4th that it ‘points to the possibility of becoming constructively uprooted.’2Whether through personal choice or unavoidable external circumstances, those with Uranus in the 4th are not meant to be bound by the traditional biological family unit. They may feel like outsiders, strangers or outcasts from their families of origin; or for some reason, the early home life was disrupted and the family scattered. This placement of Uranus implies a need to find where they truly belong as their family or racial roots don’t seem to provide this kind of containment. Often deeply restless, they require the space and freedom to search for their true ‘spiritual’ home or family.
Fearing the loss of alternatives, they are sometimes reluctant to put down any roots at all – maybe there is some place better or more appropriate around the corner. In certain instances I have seen, this disruption has been attracted externally as if by fate – something from the outside compels a move or the need to uproot. Or everything seems to be perfectly secure in the home until Uranus in the 4th is ‘triggered’ by progression or transit and suddenly, out of the blue, they pick up and leave or the family breaks up or changes in some way.
This placement could also describe an unusual home life. The home could be used as a meeting place for groups or organizations where different ideas are exchanged. They may live in a utopian community, or a housing venture based on something slightly unconventional. The father (or hidden parent) may bear some of the characteristics of Uranus. He may have been unconventional or erratic in some way or literally kept appearing and disappearing from the home scene. He might have felt trapped by being a parent. Sometimes he is physically present but remains an unknown quantity with whom a close emotional rapport is difficult. Occasionally, I have seen Uranus in the 4th in the charts of people who, as they were growing up, watched their fathers suffer mental breakdowns. More positively, it can be a father who is highly original, inventive, free-thinking, and loving without being smothering.
Although this may not be revealed until later in life, those with Uranus in the 4th are often deeply unconventional. In some cases, they may live in a certain way until mid-life and then radically change their lifestyle when Uranus opposes its own place. An interest in metaphysics and in philosophical and political systems may surface as they grow older.
Uranus in the 4th is similar to Aquarius on the IC or in the 4th house. An identity needs to be found which is based on something other than just the personal family unit.At some stage in the life, they may want to participate in an activity which benefits or advances the family of humanity.
Uranus in the 5th
Rather than relying on conventional or traditional modes of self-expression, those with Uranus in the 5th should let their individuality shine through whatever they do. Similar to Uranus in the 1st, they almost can’t help being innovative and different. Elvis Presley, who combined a whole new trend in music in the 1950s with a way of moving his body that many people found shocking, was born with Uranus in Aries in the 5th. Those with Uranus in this house may never be totally satisfied with what they create, always thinking it could have been better or more ideal. Sometimes creative inspiration comes in a flash, like a bolt of lightning charging the body.
We have personified some of the other planets in the 5th as children playing in a sandbox – what would Uranus be like there? True to form, it’s hard to predict. He would probably join the others at first, but eventually get bored. Castles are a ‘cinch’ and so dreadfully banal, besides it’s very frustrating trying to construct a model of the Houston Space Center in something as one-dimensional as sand. Doesn’t anyone have a new computer game he hasn’t mastered yet? Having persuaded Mars and Jupiter to come with him to practise a few new stunts on his recently acquired BMX bike, he can’t resist a passing comment to Saturn on how to improve the castle he is still putting the finishing touches to (see Saturn in the 5th).
Later in life, Uranus is more interested in what others find weird and eccentric and may pursue hobbies which are out of the ordinary. The same goes for love affairs and romances – which may be unconventional and with sudden beginnings and endings. Uranus becomes bored when the initial excitement and enthusiasm wanes, or if the affair becomes too known or constricting. At that point, justifications are sought for an abrupt finish.
Most people create on the ordinary biological level by producing children, but those with Uranus in the 5th have to find other ways than the purely biological to express themselves. Even if they do have children, their creative needs won’t be totally satisfied by just being a parent. If they cling too closely to offspring or try to turn them into vessels to ‘live out’ their unused potential, the children will probably react by breaking away from home as soon as possible. In certain cases, it may be the parent who leaves the child. I have seen a few instances of women with Uranus in the 5th who have very little desire to be mothers, or who have been separated from their children for various reasons. Uranus in this house seems to ask people to find additional ways of fulfilling the need for creative outlets rather thanonlythrough bearing progeny. As parents, their views on raising children are likely to be progressive or contrary to what society upholds. The English poet, Percy Bysshe Shelley, had Uranus in Leo in the 5th ruling Aquarius on the 11th. After the death of his wife, he was denied custody of the children because of his atheistic beliefs.
Uranus in the 6th
Those with Uranus in the 6th are meant to explore in a deeper way the intimate relationship between the inner world of the mind and feelings and the outer world of form and the body. A connection exists between what we are inside and the kind of everyday reality we create for ourselves. Uranus in the 6th has a chance to learn that inorder to change the outside, the inside must be altered first. Any problems which they face in their daily lives or physical bodies can be met with the questions: what patterns in me produced these difficulties and how can I change them? Self-examination, based on the liberating idea that we create and are responsible for our own reality, is the key to a positive experience of Uranus in the 6th. Otherwise they are prone to minor or major upheavals in the life – such as falling ill to avoid going to a job they don’t like, rather than admitting first they are feeling trapped by the work and acting accordingly to change the situation.
In fact, the whole area of work and employment can be approached in a non-conventional way. Rarely suited to a repetitive nine-to-five routine, they will usually find it difficult to stay in a job purely out of a sense of duty or for the sake of security. Their minds need to be continually engaged and interested in the tasks before them and it’s best if their work allows scope for change, variety, inventiveness and movement. Often there is difficulty working under others because they need to approach any job in their own way – even if it has never been done in that fashion previously. However, if Uranus is not too badly aspected, exchanging ideas with co-workers can be lively and stimulating.
Often, they are interested in the new technologies as well as subjects like astrology or other related metaphysical or psychological systems – anything which gives them a frame of reference from which to observe and meet life. They might suit a ‘think-tank’ situation.
In general, they do not like to be bound by the little everyday necessities and routines of existence and may create upheavals to make life more interesting and exciting. Again, life might become easier if they consciously acknowledge what they don’t like, and do something to change that area rather than subtly provoking external forces to disrupt it for them.
Interested in the relationship between mind and body, they might explore various forms of alternative and complementary medicines, sometimes experimenting with unusual diets and various exercise routines. Health problems can stem from too much stress and nervous tension which weakens the body’s defences. An overly inhibited 6th house Uranus attracts the Furies (see page 204), which may lodge themselves in the body, creating havoc in the system. In charts I have seen, there appears to be a connection between Uranus in the 6th and various forms of allergies. Interestingly, some medical researchers have linked allergies with unexpressed anger and resentment, suggesting that people with ‘short fuses’ are more prone to allergic conditions. (In her book on medical astrology, Eileen Nauman associates Uranus with ‘the actual impulses that leap from one nerve synapse to another’.3) Obviously, those with Uranus here will benefit from any form of activity which helps them unwind – physical exercises, yoga, meditation, etc. On the positive side, Uranus offers the possibility of a speedy recovery or release from illness, helped enormously by the right mental attitudes.
If we take the combination of Uranus and the 6th house to its logical conclusion, then there may be the possibility of unusual pets. One woman I know with this placement keeps rats as pets in the house – uncaged, of course.

Uranus in the 7th
The attitude towards relationships needs to extend beyond a wholly conventional framework if Uranus is in the 7th. While many people remain in a relationship because of a need for safety and security or out of a sense of duty, those with Uranus here will find it hard to endure a lifeless or outworn partnership just for those reasons. If a relationship is not creative, exhilarating, open and honest, they may disrupt it for the sake of finding something better.
One or both partners might require more space and freedom than is found in the typical marriage or close union. Rather than simply being categorized as somebody’s mate, they need other interests outside of the relationship from which to gain a sense of identity and vitality.
If those with this placement are not the prime movers in acting out the urges of Uranus, they may attract or select a partner who perpetrates this for them. If they don’t acknowledge their restlessness or need for a less conventional structure, then they might provoke the other person to somehow alter the state of affairs. The general rule with Uranus in any house is that the more we acknowledge its presence there and internalize its nature, the less likely it is that external situations force upheaval on us.
Problems occur when planets which by nature crave security, convention or closeness – such as the Moon, Venus or Saturn – are in hard aspect to a 7th house Uranus. In such cases, one side of the person yearns for the intimacy and safety of a relationship while another bit of them is frightened of losing their separate individuality or being too confined by the partnership. As with Jupiter in this house, a possible resolution is finding a partner with the same conflicts – keeping an awareness of the dilemma in the open and structuring the relationship accordingly. An atmosphere in which the two people can freely exchange and discuss their feelings and moods without the other taking it too personally will facilitate this arrangement. They will need to recognize that each person is an individual in his or her own right, and not someone who exists solely to fulfil whatever one or the other requires at any particular moment. Obviously, a fair degree of maturity will be needed to accomplish this, and their best relationships usually come when they are older and wiser about themselves and life in general.
Those with Uranus in the 7th sometimes experience revelations and sudden changes in outlook and attitude which render a present relationship obsolete. New ones are sought which reflect the changed state of mind. In general, there is the need to periodically re-stimulate or reinvigorate an existing relationship, usually when Uranus is triggered by progression or transit.
The 7th house describes what we are seeking in a partner, as well as qualities which might be latent or undeveloped in ourselves. Those with Uranus there seek a highly original, spirited, dynamic, inventive, magical and charismatic partner – someone who wakes them up and offers change or new vistas. However, a person of this nature is not likely to be the kind who brings a great degree of stability and security to a relationship.
Our society places a lot of pressure on people to marry – to such a degree that those who are not married or in a close conventional relationship may feel that there is something dreadfully flawed about them. Those leading a single lifestyle may need to remind themselves that theyare worthwhilewhether they are in a relationship or not. The 7th house also refers to social interaction in general and the principles of Uranus will apply here, possibly indicating those who are meant to bring new ideas, insights and breakthroughs to society in general, by virtue of their work or who they are.

Uranus in the 8th
The 8th house, the natural domain of Scorpio, engenders those kinds of emotions and feelings so often awakened by the agony and the ecstasy of love – passions like lust, jealousy, rage, envy, possessiveness and vindictiveness. Uranus seeks to approach this sphere somehow differently from the way most people go about it. Often those with Uranus in the 8th have a compelling urge to free themselves from the restrictions of the basic instinctual nature, and to overcome being ruled by such emotions. They may continually expose themselves to situations which challenge them to rise above and develop detachment from these primal instincts in order to forge a broader and more tolerant understanding than such messy feelings allow – for instance, the concept of a communal marriage or even husband-and wife-swapping. In some cases they may try this sort of liberality and fail miserably.
Similarly, they may seek to express the instinctual nature in other ways than merely for the purpose of mating and procreation. Hence, the reputation of this placement for some degree of sexual curiosity and experimentation. Others might look for techniques and systems which enable them to transcend the realm of libidinal desire through redirecting the sex drive into other outlets.
In cases I have seen, Uranus in the 8th alternates between the extremes of excessive passion and inhumane coldness. For instance, believing fervently in a certain cause, they may not think twice about planting a bomb in a department store if this would promote their mission. One Nazi leader eventually hanged for atrocious war crimes, Joachim von Ribbentrop, had Uranus in Scorpio in the 8th ruling an Aquarian Ascendant.
Those with Uranus in the 8th often have a desire to probe beneath the surface level of existence to discover the more subtle laws of nature operating in life. Astrology, psychology, alchemy, the occult, magic, sub-atomic physics or modern chemistry might interest them. One man who literally explored the potentially transformative and explosive possibilities of the deeper strata of life was Enrico Fermi. Born with Uranus in Sagittarius (the sign of the explorer) in the 8th house, he not only discovered uranium fission but also produced the first nuclear chain reaction. Along similar lines, Uranus in the 8th may be fascinated by what death is all about, and attempt to understand it in a less conventional framework. Psychic and telepathic experiences are not uncommon for people with Uranus in this house, although some may not have too much control over them when they occur.
On a more mundane level, sudden reversals of fortune could come through marriage, inheritance and business partnerships. Also, phases of the life may end suddenly and irreversibly: seemingly overnight, one chapter finishes and another begins, or an unforeseen event drastically alters the direction in which the person is heading.
Uranus in the 9th
Uranus is always searching for ‘the truth’ and what better house to do it in than the 9th, the natural abode of Sagittarius. Rather than adhere to traditional or orthodox views, they must independently find a meaningful set of beliefs or a philosophical system by which to order life. But in true Uranian fashion, they will keep on destroying systems they have created for the sake of discovering or trying out new ones which might be broader or more inclusive.
The image of God may be cast in the likeness of Uranus – the starry heavens – vast and very difficult to grasp. And yet, just as there are laws which guide the movementof the planets, somewhere in it all, there must be a system. (Einstein, who had Aquarius on the 9th house cusp, once remarked, ‘I cannot believe that God plays dice with the cosmos.’) Those with Uranus difficultly aspected could, at certain times, adhere to quite odd or fanatical cults. Too abstract, their philosophy may not translate easily into everyday life. Occasionally, they might have flashes or insights into what they believe are the workings of the Divine or Universal Mind. Lois Rodden gives the chart of Guy Ballard with Uranus in Leo in the 9th squared to Pluto in Taurus in the 6th. Ballard founded a religious movement called ‘Mighty I am’, and reportedly received messages from ‘the Ascended Masters’, and glimpsed his previous lives from seventy thousand years back. A more down-to-earth use of this placement is shown in the chart of Mohandas Gandhi with Uranus in Cancer in the 9th ruling Aquarius on the IC (the homeland). On the basis of his strongly felt philosophy (Uranus in the 9th), he led his people from colonialism to freedom (Uranus rules Aquarius on the 4th). The profound sage and mystic, Krishnamurti, was born with Uranus in Scorpio in the 9th ruling an Aquarian Ascendant. Interestingly, he preached that people should find the truth on their own (9th house Uranus rules the 1st house of self) rather than trying to follow the teachings of any particular guru or sect.
Often those with Uranus in the 9th will hold progressive views in the field of education. They may seek an alternative rather than traditional academic structure – such as an independent study programme or the Open University in England. At any time in the degree programme, they may decide to make an abrupt change in their course of study. A 9th house Uranus can bring new ideas, concepts, and insights into any field.
Unusual and unexpected experiences can come through travel. They might, while visiting another country, encounter people or ideas which wake them up and shatter old structures. An in-law may even be the catalyst for inspiring new vision.
If Uranus is not too adversely aspected, they will probably have an uncanny insight into future trends, as if they can feel the pulse of society. The science fiction writer Jules Verne, who often anticipated the course of the future, was born with Uranus in Capricorn in the 9th.
Uranus in the 10th (and Aquarius on the MC)
Those with Uranus in the 10th need to contribute something original and progressive to society. They don’t want to be seen as ordinary, but rather as forces for change, rebellion or innovation. Because the 10th is Capricorn’s natural domain, there is the ability to channel their new ideas or insights through concrete vehicles. Often, they will hold fairly liberal or even radical political views. Karl Marx, who inspired others with his vision of a new world, was born with Uranus in Sagittarius in the 10th ruling an Aquarian Ascendant. The artistic genius and gifted inventor Michelangelo was born with Uranus in Scorpio in the 10th ruling Aquarius on the 2nd. Disraeli, so far the only Jew ever to be Prime Minister of England, also had Uranus in the 10th. With Aquarius on the cusp of the 3rd, he was noted for his extreme speech and dress, and even wrote a few novels.
I have known a number of people with this placement who have resigned from jobs because they didn’t agree with how things were being run. Others I have come across constantly change their work in search of something more meaningful to do. Like Uranus in mythology, they destroy their creations and start again. Edmond Rostand (Uranus in Cancer in the 10th ruling Aquarius in the 5th) was first a lawyer, then ajournalist, before he finally became a poet and playwright and author ofCyrano deBergerac. Sometimes, those with Uranus in the 10th have unusual jobs. (One woman with this placement headed a research project into the effects of dance and high protein diet on body fat in women.) Or they wake up one morning with a revelation which renders their present work obsolete. Sometimes events seemingly out of the control will disrupt the status quo in the career. Again, if they have not acknowledged their restlessness or need for a change in this area, they may in some way provoke this to happen. Others will simply fall prey to collective trends which shatter or alter their course of direction, such as redundancy or changes of political power.
The mother may be cast in a Uranian light. She might be viewed as eccentric or unconventional in some way. She might have had outside interests which interfered with the mothering role, or felt trapped as a parent. The child could have sensed a degree of restlessness in her, as if she really wanted to be somewhere else. If the mother was very erratic, then the child would be forced to develop more independently, not being able to rely on the mother as most children do. At first, children may resent this, but later reflect thankfully that they had a chance to grow freely and learn how to meet the world on their own. Sometimes the mother is conventional on the outside, but underneath is bursting with a desire to break loose. Children sense this and later ‘live out’ the mother’s unfulfilled wishes – they carefully avoid getting hemmed in by too much maternal or familial responsibility. Sometimes, Uranian mothers feel guilty about their lack of typical maternal instincts, forgetting their good traits – loving without being smothering, they mirror and represent free-thinking for the child. Women with Uranus in the 10th may be happier raising children after they have satisfied some of their need to contribute to society.
Uranus in the 10th is similar to Aquarius there. With Aquarius on the MC, work is needed which benefits as many people as possible, and which allows scope for the inventive and idealistic side of the person’s nature to come to the fore.
Uranus in the 11th
Powerfully placed in its own house, Uranus in the 11th can expand the concept of being part of a group to its broadest dimensions. Their main task is a far-reaching one: to widen their individual identities to include all living creatures. This goal may never be realized completely, but it is liberating just striving to accomplish it.
Ultimately, those with Uranus in this house are capable of feeling a sense of kinship with the whole human race. Rather than just seeing the world as an assortment of people and nations attacking and accusing one another, they have the ability to view the whole planet as one family struggling to resolve its problems and conflicts. The difference in these two perspectives is subtle but profound.
Those with Uranus in the 11th should seek others with whom they can link together in the pursuit of a common goal. Generally we form friends with neighbours or people we meet at work; but people with Uranus in this house feel most connected to those with whom they share a similar vision. They don’t have to be geographically close to each other to be part of the group – what is important is that they are dedicated to the same ideals and objectives. Someone once said that ‘the group is the self of the altruist’ and this may ring true for Uranus (or Neptune) in the 11th. Obviously, many people with Uranus in the 11th won’t even begin to see it this way; nonetheless, such possibilities do exist for this placement.
More generally, Uranus in the 11th enjoys mixing with like-minded people, whether it’s a group of scientists or astrologers. They may serve a ‘Uranian function’ within any group: presenting challenging and radical ideas, playing the devil’s advocate, or sparring with other members to make the debate more lively. If Uranus is difficultly aspected, they might promulgate revolutionary ideas which could be too hard-hitting and drastic. They may also fall out with other members of the group over a matter of principle. Like Mars in the 11th, on one level Uranus may be ambivalent in a group. They enjoy sharing and being part of something larger, and yet are threatened by losing their individuality and freedom in the process.
On a personal level, they will generally have strong feelings about the meaning of friendship and expect others to live up to these. Sometimes their high ideals may be unrealistic given the more selfish and instinctive side of human nature. This placement could indicate friends who serve as important catalysts for change. Likewise, they could be the agents who bring fresh experience to their friends. Some people with Uranus in the 11th may have a fascination for slightly eccentric people, who express sides of their natures that those with this placement are not acknowledging in themselves. Sometimes they have many different types of friends who wouldn’t mix easily with one another.
Their goals and objectives in life could change radically in a relatively short span of time, as if they wake up one day with a new vision which they must follow.
Uranus in the 12th
The 12th house represents the collective sea out of which we all emerge. Those with Uranus in the 12th need to take a deep breath and jump in, not forgetting to bring along their best diving equipment and research apparatus. Through exploring the unconscious it is possible for them to regain a sense of continuity with evolutionary and historic processes and glimpse the guiding patterns on which their lives are based. It’s not everyone’s cup of tea, but in whatever house Uranus is placed, we have to take risks and be different.
People with Uranus in the 12th can approach the whole unconscious realm in an inventive, original and intuitive way. They have access to the mind’s storehouse of ancestral wisdom – experiences accrued in the past and inherited through previous generations. Some find the key to unlocking this treasure through drugs, others through meditation or any form of artistic expression which allows them to ‘tune into’ these ancient records of experience.
The philosophy and radical psychology of R. D. Laing form one of the clearest expositions of what a 12th house Uranus is all about. Laing, who was born with Uranus in Aries in the 12th ruling Aquarius on the cusp of the 12th, wrote that ‘the need to know who one is appears to be the most deep rooted in humanity.’4Sceptical of almost every social institution in existence (including the family), he believes that the mystical state of consciousness is the only salvation left for the oppressed individual. He maintains that if people could go deep into their unconscious psychoses, in their own way and at their own pace, they would eventually re-emerge from their regression repaired and more whole. On this basis, he established his own institution (Uranus in Aries in the 12th) – homes in which people could go on a ‘voyage within the self’.5
Dr Arthur Janov, born with Uranus in Pisces in the 12th ruling Aquarius on the cusp of the 11th, is another well-known and controversial psychologist. Like Laing, he also set up his own institution. At Janov’s Primal Therapy Institute in Los Angeles, peopleare encouraged to delve deeply into their unconscious (12th) and relive painful experiences from early life. During primal therapy, patients are helped to feel what they were too frightened to feel when they first had the experience. By reconnecting to and abreacting the pain stored up in the psyche, they aim to free themselves from tensions and symptoms they have been carrying around for years. Again, similar to Laing, the principle is that by freeing what is in the unconscious (Uranus in the 12th) a person can be renewed and liberated.
Uranus in the 12th can also give a close attunement to movements within the collective, often before these actually manifest (the 12th house contains the seeds of the future as well as the remnants from the past). In a collection of her essays on the outer planets and their cycles, Liz Greene points out that Uranus in this house often has ‘a very strong interest in political movements and ideologies, but in a rather compulsive as opposed to reflective way.’6Adolf Hitler, born with Uranus in Libra in the 12th ruling Aquarius on the cusp of the 4th (the homeland), is a case in point. His vision was not rationally and logically thought out, but rather ‘appeared in his mind full-blown’.7Uranus gets the rumblings of something even before it happens.
From what I have observed, if Uranus is well-aspected in the 12th, these people have a wealth of good advice to offer others – as if insight and knowledge are there on tap. However, if Uranus has many hard aspects, then their vision is sometimes impaired by their own personal neuroses and complexes. These will have to be ‘cleaned up’ before the positive benefits of this placement are felt. They are also more likely to be thrown off course by negative feelings in the atmosphere. Regardless of how Uranus is aspected, there is often an interest in parapsychology and spiritualism.
A deep-seated reluctance to relinquish their independence can make it difficult for them to settle down or take root. One part of them might desperately want closeness and security but somehow they manage to thwart this happening. Exploring their own unconscious motivations can free them from this conundrum and help alleviate a lingering sense of loneliness and isolation.
Some join secret societies or engage in ‘behind-the-scenes’ work for groups. They may align themselves with institutions of a progressive or unusual nature. Acting as a channel through which new ideas and trends are established, they could revolutionize or disrupt the workings of any institution with which they are involved.
Periods of confinement or incarceration may produce surprising effects. In a few cases I have seen, they have not acknowledged a need to temporarily retreat from life and consequently attracted ‘accidents’ or illnesses which forced them to do so. Sudden reversals of fortune are possible: something which seems ominous and threatening may turn out to be completely different from what they expect, and vice versa.
It could be fruitful to enquire about anything unusual which might have occurred to the mother during the gestation period – in some way, this may have impressed itself on the psyche of the developing embryo.
Notes – Chapter 251. Jane Malcomson, ‘Uranus and Saturn: Castration and Incest, Part I’,The AstrologicalJournal, The Astrological Association, London, Summer, 1982.2. Rudhyar,The Astrological Houses, p. 198.3. Naumann,The American Book of Nutrition and Medical Astrology, Astro Computing Services, California, 1982, p. 9.4. Laing cited in Shaffer,Humanistic Psychology, Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, USA, 1978, p. 50.5. Laing cited in Shaffer, p. 56.6. Liz Greene,The Outer Planets and Their Cycles, CRCS Publications, Reno, Nevada, 1983, p. 57.7. Liz Greene,The Outer Planets and Their Cycles, p. 57.

