The Twelve Houses

26.NEPTUNE AND PISCES THROUGH THE HOUSES

The planet Neptune is associated with the Roman god of the same name and the Greek Poseidon. Personifying water, Poseidon was the god of the seas, lakes, rivers and underground streams. Although inhabiting a vast palace at the bottom of the ocean, he resented Zeus’ sovereignty and thirsted for more worldly possessions. Poseidon wrestled with Athene for Attica and lost; unsuccessfully, he battled with Hera for Argolis; and he failed to capture Aegina from Zeus. Angry and forlorn, he flooded the lands he couldn’t win, or dried up their rivers in spite. Like Poseidon (Neptune), our volatile emotions often yearn for things we can’t have.
The astrological element of water, associated with the realm of the feelings, acts similarly to Poseidon in other ways. When he emerged from the sea, one of two things happened. Sometimes the water opened joyfully and magnificently around him. At other times, however, his appearance was signified by wild tempests and furious storms. Likewise, when our feelings come to the surface, they can be full and divinely inspired or they can sweep over us like a tidal wave.
The planet Neptune, like the Moon and Venus, is anotheranimaenergy – representing that part of us which fuses, adapts, mirrors and seeks union with others. While Mother Moon gains her identity by reflecting another, and charming Venus gives with the intention of receiving a little back in return, soulful Neptune wants to lose his identity by merging with something greater than himself.
Whereas the main task of the isolated ego (Saturn) is self-preservation, the planet Neptune symbolizes the yearning to dissolve the boundaries of the separate self and experience unity with the rest of life. We’ve encountered these two principles already in the general discussion of the 12th house, and if you remember, they are not the best of friends. In fact, Saturn (representing the structuring principle of the ego), afraid that he would be overthrown by Neptune, swallows him at birth. For many people, the prospect of disintegration of the individual identity is frightening, and they will relegate Neptune – the urge to reconnect to the wholeness of life – to the unconscious. But (to borrow Liz Greene’s analogy), whatever is shoved into the basement has a way of burrowing itself out from under the house and appearing on the front lawn. If Neptune is suppressed, it doesn’t go away – instead, it disguises itself and sneaks up on us. In Neptune’s house, we may unwittingly ‘set up’ circumstances in which we have no other alternative than to sacrifice our personal wants and desires in obedience to forces which we cannot change or do anything to alleviate. In this way, the individual ego is cleansed of its sense of almighty superiority and separateness. Purified, we are welcomed into the arms of something bigger than ourselves.
Actually, it was Jupiter who rescued Neptune from Saturn’s tyranny: the individual ego’s own desire to expand itself (Jupiter) eventually undermines its very separateness by allowing Neptune to run free. Likewise, many people, rather than dreading the disintegration of the ego, actively encourage it, in a pursuit of the expansion and bliss associated with an unbounded existence. This can be constructively achieved throughmeditation, faith and worship, artistic creativity, and a selfless devotion to another person and cause; or more dangerously attempted through drugs, alcohol or an unbridled abandonment to the passions.
Some people, vaguely remembering a lost Eden of the past, look for heaven on earth in Neptune’s house. In the belief that Neptune should give us everything, we may pin great hopes on the affairs of his domain, as if our very redemption lay there. Having bargained on nothing less than absolute ecstasy, we are invariably disappointed when the external world fails to deliver the goods. Wounded and embittered, we may look elsewhere around the house for comfort – often in the liquor cabinet or medicine chest. However, for some of us, the disillusionment entailed in not obtaining what we desire from Neptune is an entry point into another dimension of experience: rather than searching for our happiness solely in the outer realities of life, we turn our attention inward. And eventually we may discover that the bliss we were looking for was already there, inside ourselves, hidden away in Neptune’s indestructible golden palace under the sea.
It took Jupiter to rescue Neptune, and very often in the house in which Neptune is placed we are looking for a saviour. Playing the victim or the underdog (at the same time abnegating personal responsibility and effort), we hope somebody will appear to take care of that area of life for us. Conversely, some people invert this dynamic and attempt to be a saviour for others in that domain. Unlike Saturn, this is not undertaken because of the pressure of an ‘ought’ or ‘should’, but much more out of a sense of empathy for the other person’s pain. In some cases, we may even become the living embodiment of some sort of popular image or ideal in Neptune’s sphere – anything from a neo-god or goddess, or a superstar, to a public scandal or convenient scapegoat.
As might be imagined of the god of the sea, Neptune is rather slippery. Something we are chasing in this area of life may mysteriously evade us. Often, instead of facing up to the facts, we will act like Blanche Dubois and create the illusion that everything is wonderful. We may choose to see only that which supports our fantasy. Sooner or later, reality will probably crash down on us. Then again, maybe not: we can never be sure with Neptune.
Neptune is associated with the things of the etheric world, which cannot necessarily be grasped, measured or seen. It is the essence underlying form, rather than the form itself. Through Neptune’s house we may glimpse a higher or altered state of consciousness, a view of infinity and eternity and that which transcends normal boundaries of space and time. On another level, Neptune is fog, mist and nebulousness; and by house, it may show where we are perennially confused, vague and unclear about our aims and goals or inclined to drift and float with whatever comes along. If (as Neptune believes) everything is All One, then, whatever happens, it shouldn’t make that much difference to us anyway.
Two figures associated with Neptune are Dionysus and Christ. Both preached relinquishing the separate identity and the need to merge with something numinous and divine. Dionysus gathered a group of followers and with the help of the intoxicating effects of wine they were transported via feeling and ecstasy to another realm. Oblivious to the mundane realities of life, they simply abandoned themselves to something greater than the self – not bothering if their cars were parked on a double yellow line, or if they were meant to be at home putting dinner on the table for their husbands. In this sense, they transcended time, boundary and form.
Christ is considered by some to be ‘the Neptunian Master’. Both a victim and a saviour, he taught ‘the giving up’ of the self to the spirit. The establishment – ordinary ego-consciousness – found it difficult to recognize either Christ or Dionysus as gods. Both of them suffered forms of dismemberment. Both died, but were born again. The house position of Neptune is where we may share, to some degree, the experience of these divinities. In this domain, we may fall apart, so that we can come back together again in a different way, opened up to something beyond the ego. Attitudes of willingness, acceptance and faith aid the process. Sometimes, in Neptune’s house, we have no other viable choices.
Pisces on the cusp or contained within a house is similar to Neptune there. The house with Neptune in it will influence any house where Pisces is found. For instance, Marilyn Monroe was born with Neptune in the 1st house and Pisces on the 8th house cusp. She came to symbolize an idealized image of feminine sexuality (Pisces on the 8th) and sacrificed much of her own identity in the process (Neptune in the 1st house of self).
Neptune in the 1st
In the 1st house, Neptune diffuses the boundary between a sense of the self as a separate entity and other people. In extreme cases, those with Neptune in the 1st are like mirrors – they just reflect who or whatever is in front of them. Because they often derive their identities from what other people want or need them to be, others may look to them for their salvation: ‘At last, here is a person who really understands and appreciates me, and who is just naturally everything that I need in another person.’ However, the honeymoon is over when they observe that Neptune in the 1st opens up, adjusts and adapts in a similar fashion to whoever is around, not just to them. We might rightfully praise 1st house Neptunes for their exquisite sensitivity to other people; but we might also concern ourselves with their lack of a clear or well-defined sense of their own identity and direction in life. Not having crystallized a sense of self, they appropriate someone else’s.
In general, the 1st house thrust to distinguish the self as a distinct and unique individual conflicts with Neptune’s tendency to dissolve and merge back into a state of non-differentiated wholeness. Just when they build up something or establish a more solid footing, events seemingly conspire to erode or undermine the foundations – and down comes the structure. For whatever reasons, a person with Neptune in the 1st is being asked to sacrifice or let go of the sense of being a separate self. This kind of selfless or egoless state is the goal of many mystical seekers, and this placement of Neptune may be ‘a natural’ in this respect. But one might rightfully enquire whether or not Neptune in this house ever had a self to relinquish in the first place.
The problem may stem from the early bonding with the mother. We cannot grow separate and self-reliant unless another person has loved us enough to make us feel that we are worthy of being ‘a somebody’. A symbiotic closeness to Mother is the first stage of this process: in the early years, we need a close, caring, good-enough mother in order to develop the courage and strength to grow into an autonomous individual. If this does not happen, we are not only afraid to be ourselves, but we will keep searching for that ‘perfect fit’ with another person which we didn’t have as children, adjusting ourselves all out of proportion to achieve this. But the problem is thatif we are not enough, thennobody else is ever enough either.
However, if as children we are secure with Mother’s love, we eventually begin to feel that we can do with a little less of it. Besides, we want to explore more of theenvironment, venturing out and experimenting with things. At this stage, Mother must be willing to let go of us – otherwise we may be made to feel guilty about our need for separateness.
With Neptune in the 1st house, something could have gone askew at either of these two important stages of symbiosis and separation. If there was not a secure enough tie with the mother, then they might be afraid to develop a strong, individual identity. But if they were forbidden by her to separate, they may never have had the chance to find out who they are in their own right. With the help of therapy or any of the many forms of self-exploration available today, it is never too late to start.
With Neptune in the 1st, the personality or style may embody any of the possible connotations of Neptune. While their diffuseness may make them appear mysterious or enigmatic, some wander aimlessly through life. Many too easily slip into the role of martyr and then feel resentful if others take advantage of them. Some are fair game for anyone who offers to save or rescue them. A few may turn to hard drugs and alcohol in an attempt to alleviate the harsher realities of life and find themselves worse off in the end.
However, there are many positive ways to embody Neptune. Because they can encompass realms beyond the ordinary ego-borders of existence, they may be able to give expression to collective feelings and images through some sort of artistic medium. Their vision may be truly inspiring to other people who are unable to see so easily in those dimensions. And this placement often appears in the charts of excellent counsellors and healers: the diffuse boundaries of Neptune enable them to ‘tune into’ and help other people. Some dedicate their whole lives to uplifting or redeeming the planet.
If Neptune is close to the Ascendant, the person may never really have wanted to be born in the first place. They will need to learn to say ‘Yes’ to life to counter-effect a persistent longing to return back to the oceanic totality of the womb. Alternatively, these desires may be projected forward in a spiritual direction, giving rise to the mystical longing for higher states of consciousness.
With Neptune in the 1st, some confusion may attend the birth and early years of life. I have seen this placement in the charts of people whose actual births were shrouded in mystery or kept secret from others. Early conditions may not contribute to their sense of trust and security in life, as if they are called upon to sacrifice the degree of love and attention that is normally bestowed on the newborn infant. Illness at an early age could further accentuate the tenuous hold they have on life in their bodies.
Neptune in the 2nd
Like Uranus in this position, Neptune in the 2nd requires a deeper understanding and feeling for the whole sphere of money, possessions and resources. Neptune has a dissolving effect wherever it is placed in the chart, and in the 2nd, any tangible or outer forms of security may be subject to this influence. Unconsciously, the person may feel guilty about acquiring money or holding onto possessions, believing that what belongs to one should belong to all. Conversely, they may feel that the world owes them a living – what is other people’s should rightfully be theirs as well. Whether they like it or not, watery Neptune creates fluidity in the 2nd house sphere.
I have seen a variety of manifestations of this placement. Sometimes, it indicates general confusion and nebulousness in the handling of finance and investment.Unforeseen forces undermine speculation – what seemed safe turns out to be a fraud. In some cases, thieves come in the night and claim what they feel should be theirs. Or they may receive a large cheque in the first post and a bill for the same amount in the second. Or, generous to a fault, they are a soft touch for any hard luck story, continually reaching into their pockets to give spare change away, or getting out the cheque book to donate to a worthy cause.
Poseidon had great riches under the sea and yet he still longed for the earthly power of Zeus. Those with Neptune in the 2nd may be dissatisfied with what they already have and always want more – especially if someone else has it. They may worship money and possessions as the key to heaven on earth, or value money because it allows them to live out their fantasies. Even if they achieve the material status they hope to gain, they may discover that it isn’t all that they imagined it would be. Something is still lacking.
Ultimately, rather than seeking security and well-being from outside of themselves, they might need to reconsider their value systems and look inward to what some call the ‘higher spiritual planes’ for fulfilment. They might even unconsciously provoke this by ‘setting up’ losing what they have gained or dearly value as if they sense that giving everything away is their path to rebirth and redemption.
I have observed that these people are often unsure of their own inner value and worth. They may not be appreciative enough of their innate gifts, such as their sensitivity and empathy, their artistic and creative imaginations, and the ability they have to heal and soothe others. Money could be earned through a ‘Neptunian profession’: acting, modelling, painting, poetry, dance, fashion, photography, healing, the selling of alcohol or drugs, etc. Professions as varied as that of a chemist, clergyman or merchant marine could be connected to a 2nd house Neptune.
Finally, there is a tendency to imbue the material world with symbolic and emotional significance. An object or possession may be valued not so much for what it is, but for the feelings it inspires in them. Often, they can perceive the essence underlying the form itself.
Neptune in the 3rd
Neptune is where we are looking to be reconnected with a sense of wholeness and oneness in life. By contrast, the usual 3rd house type mind is one which analyses, compares, discriminates and observes the relationship of one thing to another. While Neptune in the 3rd can (just about) still do this, the mind must also be used for other ‘higher’ purposes – as the vehicle or eye through which the soul looks outward. On a deep level, those with Neptune in the 3rd know that,divorced from love, the mind is like apair of scissors which cuts life into shreds.
On one level, Neptune in the 3rd can confuse and scatter the mind, giving rise to vagueness and woolly thinking. However, at other times, the Neptunian mind exhibits an uncanny insight into the undercurrents and subtleties in the environment. They sense the ‘meta-message’ or hidden nuances and meanings behind what is said or exchanged. What they lose in terms of precise analytical abilities, they gain by being able to view the bigger picture more clearly.
There are some dangers to bear in mind. Their desire to see what is beautiful and divine in their surroundings can produce a kind of selective perception in which only the good is seen and that which doesn’t fit into this category goes unnoticed. They maybe so open to the mind and opinions of others that they may think they are thinking their own thoughts when in actual fact they have picked up the point of view of somebody else in the environment. In some cases, they serve as spokespeople for others. Sometimes, they believe that knowledge is what will redeem them. As a result they may study avidly and yet never feel they know enough. Or they are gluttonous for other people to come along and say something which inspires them.
Neptune in the 3rd may not feel comfortable expressing itself through ordinary channels of communication. What they have to say or what they have experienced may be more aptly demonstrated through dance, poetry, song or a picture they paint or take with a camera. Often, there is a shyness in the early schooling situation. I have seen this placement in some cases of dyslexia. Or they may be confused in such a way that they turn up to appointments on the wrong day, take down numbers or addresses incorrectly, and invariably get lost or waylaid on short journeys. In extreme cases, it may indicate mental instability, hallucinations, and paranoia where they imagine all sorts of things happening ‘out there’ which are actually projections of their inner world.
Sacrifices may have to be made in Neptune’s domain, and in the 3rd, this may entail a need to adjust and be extra-sensitive to a sibling, who for some reason is a problem or has difficulties. In certain cases I have seen, the ghost of a dead sibling haunts one or both of the parents, and the remaining child has been confused with the one who has passed away. If a brother or sister has died, those with Neptune in the 3rd may carry a sense of guilt, imagining they are partially responsible for the death. (Neptune diffuses the boundary between the self and others, and in the 3rd, the person may feel that he or she is responsible for everything which happens in the immediate environment.) A parent can help children with Neptune in the 3rd by respecting their imaginations and yet spelling things out as honestly and clearly as possible, bearing in mind what is age-appropriate.
I have also seen Neptune in the 3rd in the charts of children without siblings who long for companionship with the brother or sister they never had. Some may assuage loneliness and feel more complete by inventing imaginary playmates. In some cases of adopted children, Neptune is found in the 3rd, as if they are not sure where they truly fit in or belong. In a few examples of this placement, sacrifices had to be made in the area of education. They had to leave school to work for the family, or money was tight and an older brother or sister got there first.
A number of people I know with Neptune in the 3rd show exceptional ability as teachers – especially working with children who have learning difficulties. They can find ways to communicate with and understand the child that other teachers may not be able to grasp.
Neptune in the 4th (and Pisces on the IC)
Someone with this placement once said to me that she felt as if she had swallowed a mirror. From deep down inside, those with Neptune in the 4th absorb and reflect the atmospheric influences around them. If possible, they should exercise caution in selecting the environments in which they live. Of course, discrimination and free choice are not always on the same menu as Neptune.
This is a very hard placement to pin down, and I have seen it operating in a number of ways. Some people with it, no matter what the aspects to Neptune are, have reported to me the joyful wonders of their idyllic early home life – children at play in the garden,the closeness of the family, mother’s bread, daddy’s knee, grandpa’s stories, etc. And for many people, a positive 4th house Neptune indicates this kind of supportive and loving home background, which is such a good base for later development. However, some appear to spend much of their later years yearning to be back there, and comparing the problems and drudgery of adult life with the good old days. Some may have blended so thoroughly with the family, that they have never developed a more individualistic sense of who they are. The way they think and feel, and their tastes, opinions and proclivities, reflect those from the early home, full-stop. They may have come from what family therapists call ‘enmeshed families’: families who live tightly within closed systems, where there are unwritten rules that no one should behave differently from what is expected in case it upsets anyone else or causes undue disharmony. Neptune’s price for remaining within the safe structure of such a family is that of one’s own personal identity and freedom.
Others with this placement start by telling me of the joys of their early lives, and then look down, lower their voices and say, ‘But then, it all changed when father lost his job, my brother became seriously ill, mother had an affair … etc.’ Neptune is back to his old tricks again, asking for sacrifice and adjustment. In one case of a chart I did for a woman with Neptune in the 4th, I remember her describing the delights of her childhood: ‘It was all so wonderful, I wish I could have those happy days back again – except of course those times I came home from school and found daddy lying drunk on the floor and mommy beat up …’ In Neptune’s house, a person’s favourite coloured spectacles are rose.
Making sense of all this is not easy, but there are a few concrete things to be said about Neptune in the 4th. They will usually be called upon to make sacrifices on the home front. For instance, this placement shows up in the charts of people who, as children, had to be extra quiet and controlled in order not to disturb a chronically ill parent. In other cases I have seen, they were brought up in a collective environment – perhaps a boarding house or orphanage. Sometimes the home itself was also the institution where the parents worked, so that although the parents were there, they were not always available to the child. The child had to watch the parents constantly giving time and attention to other people, and this caused jealousy, insecurity and pain.
Difficult aspects to Neptune can indicate families which have been broken up or dissolved in some way. In certain cases, a 4th house Neptune may even mean the sacrifice or giving up of the homeland. Sigmund Freud, for instance, who left Austria to escape the Nazis, was born with Neptune in Pisces in the 4th. (Saturn in Gemini in the 8th squared his 4th house Neptune and we all know what he thought about the undercurrents in the early home environment.) Similarly, Neptune in the 4th could indicate the giving up of one’s tradition and family patterns as in the case of the Duke of Windsor (Neptune in Gemini in the 4th ruling Pisces in the 1st). Others will seek their ‘spiritual home and family’ – not necessarily linked to blood ties. The house may be used as a meeting place for meditation groups, psychic sessions, or as a haunt for artists and musicians. Those with Neptune in the 4th might be very happy living by the sea.
If the 4th is taken to mean the father (the hidden parent), then he will carry something of the Neptunian projection. For some, it denotes a very sensitive, soft and feeling father, often poetic and romantic. The father may be over-idealized and then appear as a disappointment later in life when examined more realistically. It could indicate an absent or missing father, one of whom the child only has a vague recollection or anunclear image. I have seen cases where the father belonged more to the world than the child: he was a clergyman, or a busy doctor, or a famous opera singer, or a politician, or a well-known actor, or a diplomat. In these cases, the children are asked to sacrifice the personal father, and often have to find within themselves the kind of love and support they saw their fathers giving so freely to others.
Neptune in the 4th is sometimes an indication of skeletons in the family closet: an alcoholic, drug-ridden or mentally disturbed parent or close relative. In a few charts I have seen with this placement, there was uncertainty about who the real father was. Of these, two of them only found out in later years that the man they thought was the father actually wasn’t.
This placement suggests deep spiritual longings which often surface in the second half of life. Hermann Hesse, the writer who immortalized the spiritual quest in his bookSiddhartha, had Neptune in Taurus in the 4th ruling Pisces on the 3rd house of writing and communication.
According to many textbooks the later years for those with Neptune in the 4th could be marked by a peaceful seclusion during which they quietly disengage from life. There is the danger, however, that they could regress back to the position of a helpless child, especially if they felt their needs were really never looked after when they were small. The way we begin life is often the way we end it – unless we bring these unconscious patterns of childhood to the surface of awareness and do something to change them. With Neptune in the 4th, this is better done sooner rather than later.
Pisces on the cusp or contained within the 4th is similar to Neptune there. With Pisces on the IC the search for a broader, all-inclusive identity is probably the best foundation upon which to build the life.
Neptune in the 5th
In the 5th, Neptune wins some and loses some. On the one hand, this position bestows a rich and vivid imagination, creative flair and the natural ability to exteriorize the feelings in a grand and exuberant manner. On the other hand, circumstances they attract into their lives may require that they give and become what others want and need, rather than what they would like to be or do for themselves. But should these coincide – that is, when what they wish to give is what others want and need to receive – then probably nothing else in the chart will equal the joy and fulfilment promised by this placement.
Back to the sandbox. The first problem is whether or not little Neptune is even free to go out and play. ‘Poor Mother works so hard at home – I should really stay in and help her.’ ‘No, don’t think of me,’ poor Mother says. ‘It will be good for you to go out with your friends – I really don’t mind (sigh).’ Guiltily, but excitedly, Neptune floats on air to the playground, bubbling with all the fun he is going to have. But what’s this, nobody is there – ‘How strange, where could they all be? (pause) I wonder what I am missing?’ ‘Well I can still play on my own.’ He climbs in the sandbox filled with the inspiration of the castles taking shape in his mind, when along comes Mercury. ‘Sorry Neptune, your mother sent me – she needs you back home – mind if I borrow your shovel?’
Sometimes the more those with Neptune (or Pisces) in the 5th search for pleasure, the more it eludes them. It’s not always this bleak – but they often are called upon to make sacrifices in the area of creativity. Some may give up a career in the arts for the sake of a more stable or routine existence. Some will give up a more stable and routine existencefor the sake of a career in the arts. But whether or not a profession in this field is sought, they will benefit from any spare-time creative outlet which offers them a chance to express their feelings, emotions and splendid imagination.
Romantically, they are usually bursting at the seams. Imbuing the beloved with divine qualities, they embark on the romance of all times. The writer F. Scott Fitzgerald was born with Mars conjunct Neptune in the 5th – and his relationship with Zelda was the Great American Romance of the period. Besides exhibiting his feelings creatively, he also openly displayed (5th) his drinking (Neptune). (Along the same lines, the singer-comedian-actor Dean Martin had a 5th house Neptune as well.) Similar to Scotty and Zelda (in his case she proved a little too Neptunian to handle), Neptune in this house may bring complications in love. One version is falling in love with someone who is unattainable in some way. In this case, the loved one can be safely idealized and worshipped at a distance, or duly sacrificed with a flair surpassed only by Our Lady of the Camellias. Very often they identify love with a cause – ‘This person needs me to save or fulfil him/her.’ Or the reverse – ‘The beloved will salvage and redeem me.’ More positively though, people with Neptune in the 5th possess, through the expansiveness and numinosity of their love, a natural gift for uplifting and healing others.
Sacrifices may have to be made regarding children. If difficultly aspected, they may feel martyred by parenthood: ‘If it weren’t for the kids, I could have done …’ They might idealize a child or turn the child into their source of salvation. ‘If the child loves me against all odds, if the child is wonderful or successful, then my life is redeemed.’ Obviously, there must be a willingness on the part of a parent with this placement to free the child to live his or her own life. The child may reflect Neptunian or Piscean qualities in the sense of possessing unusual creative or artistic abilities, or the more challenging manifestations of this planet or sign – mental, physical or emotional disabilities. What is important is the ‘spiritual growth’ gained through the experience with children. In whatever sphere of life it is placed, Neptune may indicate a kind of suffering which has the effect of softening the individual. Invariably, the parent who loses or is compelled to give up a child will be profoundly affected and altered through what Neptune has to teach. Some people with Neptune in the 5th work well with disabled or troubled children and adolescents.
Obviously, if Neptune is adversely aspected they should be very cautious about gambling and speculation. By nature, Neptune offers no guarantees.
Neptune in the 6th
There are some basic conflicts between the principles of Neptune (Pisces) and those of the 6th house. Neptune yearns for wholeness, infinity and unboundedness, while the 6th house (the natural domain of Virgo) divides everything into its component parts, examines one thing at a time, and clarifies what something is by contrasting it with something else. While Neptune keeps falling apart in order to be put back together again in a new and better way, the 6th house likes everything labelled and neatly stored in its proper place. Obviously, we can’t always have it both ways, and one or the other principle is going to have to bend. Sometimes the 6th house need for order and efficient functioning will suppress the Neptunian urges to relax, let go and just float freely. At other times, the dissolving effect of Neptune will undermine the structure and organization of everyday life and the body itself. Ultimately, the challenge for thosewith Neptune in the 6th is how to function within defined limits and boundaries and yet not lose sight of their connection to everything else around them.
Neptune in the 6th indicates a sensitive and delicate nervous system, what some writers call a weak etheric boundary or ‘leaky aura’. As a result, those with this placement are prone to invasion from outside forces or are more susceptible to germs and illnesses in the atmosphere. They would be well advised to take up an exercise or technique which strengthens the nervous system, and they should be cautious to discover which foods do or don’t agree with their system. They need to find that balance between indiscriminate indulgence (no boundaries) and over-preciousness in diet and life (too many boundaries). Usually they are sensitive to drugs and alcohol and may need much smaller quantities to feel the effects.
Illnesses are often emotional in origin and difficult to diagnose clearly. In some cases I have seen, they have been diagnosed incorrectly, given a wrong prescription, and treated for something they didn’t have. Some will benefit by seeking treatment from the alternative or complementary medicines such as homeopathy, naturopathy, acupuncture, etc., which approach prevention and cure on a more subtle level than allopathic medicine in general.
Conversely, those with Neptune in the 6th may have healing abilities and sometimes choose work which gives expression to these gifts. Some will be deeply aware of the body as a vessel of the spirit. As with many other 6th house placements, illness can be understood as a message that something in life is not right and needs adjusting. The person’s faith and attitudes will play a large part in the course of recovery. Sometimes, the psychological or spiritual awakening and understanding which comes as a result of illness will profoundly alter their whole slant on existence.
Though an illness such as cancer cannot be attributed to any one planetary placement, parallels exist between the dilemma of a 6th house Neptune and the problems caused by malignant tissue in the body. Due to X-rays, the intake of various toxins, or just because of an occasional slip-up in its functioning, the body produces cells which are not properly attuned to the needs of the whole organism. Normally, a person who is healthy and strong can fight the imperfection, but if the system is weak or overly stressed then the cell continues to malfunction. Multiplying without restraint, it produces more rogue cells – none of which are programmed to act in accordance with the maintenance of the system as a whole. The malignant growth can eventually undermine the entire body. The right relationship of the cell to the larger system of the body is analogous to the question raised by Neptune in the 6th – how to function as separate individuals and yet make adjustments and concessions to the needs of those around us.
Sacrifices may have to be made in the sphere of work, and they are often sensitive to the atmosphere in the office. In a few cases, they may be the scapegoats for what goes wrong or the victim of an employer’s or co-worker’s deceit. On the other hand, fellow workers might turn to them for salvation and support. If well-aspected, there is usually a close and uplifting rapport with associates. Some may look to a job to bring them all their happiness in life. In a few instances I have seen, they have had to work very hard while not initially receiving the recognition or remuneration they deserve for it. Employment could entail the use of Neptunian skills – careers in medicine and healing, chemistry – work which involves artistic imagination, and in some cases jobs in bars and pubs, or at sea.
Very often, they are not too interested in the mundane practicalities of everyday life. Any excuse will be found to avoid the drudgery of such unglamorous tasks as vacuuming, and such boring duties as paying bills on time. Conversely, a few may become obsessed with the daily chores, as if heaven on earth was achieved through good organization in life. (Whoever said ‘cleanliness is next to godliness’ might have had Neptune in this house.) Some will perform practical tasks as a form of service to others. Housework could also be used as an escape or way of avoiding other areas of the life that need dusting. Discrimination is advised in choosing servants, au pairs, or even the car mechanic – we are open to deception in the affairs of Neptune’s house. Again, disillusionment or pain in the domain of Neptune helps us to recognize our limits and imperfections and open us to a greater and more comprehensive awareness of ourselves and life in general.
In its most positive sense, those with Neptune in the 6th can take a divinely inspired vision and bring it into concrete manifestation. They can also see divinity everywhere. There is a saying: ‘In every particle of dust, there are present Buddhas without number.’
Neptune in the 7th
Those with Neptune in the 7th encounter complexities in the area of personal relationship which can serve to change and transform their consciousness and understanding of life. Through the joys of intimacy and closeness or through any pain, disillusionment or loss incurred in partnership, they can be reborn into a new level of awareness.
There are many different manifestations of this placement. Some people will be looking for a god or goddess to worship, to revere, and to save them. To assuage feelings of loneliness and isolation they often yearn to be absorbed into another person. Rather than taking responsibility to become a complete person in their own right, a partner may be sought to make them more whole. In this sense, they love others because theyneedthem for something. Taken to an extreme, the other person becomes like an article of clothing they wear, or a piece of equipment they use, what Martin Buber calls an ‘I-It’ relationship. Neptune is not entirely happy with this situation – this planet’s noble ideal of love is to love and not ask anything back in return. If those with Neptune in the 7th become too dependent on another person, they may find that, in one way or another, the partner lets them down or the relationship is disrupted. Consequently, they are faced with having to develop for themselves what they sought in the other person, and learn a more selfless kind of love in the bargain. Wherever Neptune is placed in the chart, a lot is asked of us.
The other variety of Neptune in the 7th are those who are looking for someone to whom they can play saviour. Their idea of relating is to rescue and redeem the other person. Hence, the reputation of this placement for an attraction to victim types – alcoholics, drug addicts, criminals, unstable people with a shady or difficult past, etc. Some will be drawn to artists and inspirational types, such as the musical genius or the religious prophet, who need an inordinate amount of mothering and cleaning up after. Very often, the one who has done the looking after and rescuing ends up feeling martyred and unappreciated.
Unconsciously, some people with Neptune in the 7th believe that by giving something up they will be cleansed and purified. On the basis of this hidden agenda, they may fall in love with someone who isn’t free or wholly attainable, such as a personalready married. Obviously, this will involve adjustments on the part of the person with Neptune there, or perhaps relinquishing the relationship entirely. In some cases I have seen, those with Neptune here settle into platonic relationships, in which the desires of the flesh are ‘transcended’.
Those with this placement are often genuinely called upon to give a great deal in relationships – to make sacrifices for the partner and be accepting of the limitations which the other person cannot easily resolve. Sometimes they exhibit a kind of unselfish love which is saintly and worthy of true respect. However, at other times they may allow themselves to be walked over as if they had no rights in the relationship. There is a fine line with Neptune between authentic selflessness and tolerance and just being a doormat.
Not surprisingly, with Neptune in the 7th there is often a very romantic and idealized notion of what a relationship should be, which doesn’t account for the hard work involved. A yearning for perfection in the partner and in the partnership itself means that those with Neptune in the 7th might actually be very difficult people to live with. Unconsciously, they can be extremely critical and judging of flaws in the other person which don’t match up to their concept of what their partner ought to be like or fail to match their notion of Love. Some present the façade of a perfect relationship to the public, when, in actual fact, it is very far from the ideal. More positively, there may be a spiritual meeting and union of two people, and an uncanny psychic rapport between them. However, no matter how divinely ordained the union might seem, there is still the need to adjust to the differences elicited by personal idiosyncrasies. Two soul-mates can still argue about the manner in which the other squeezes the toothpaste tube.
After we strip away the fantasy, glamour, ecstasy and romantic notions of love, what does Neptune leave us? Ultimately, this planet represents a non-attached kind of love, a love that does not cling, or swallow up any of the people involved. Not a union based on ‘oughts’ and ‘shoulds’ but one of reciprocity,which respects the other person’s need foracceptance, not approval.As Marilyn Ferguson writes inThe Aquarian Conspiracy,‘Love is a context, not a behaviour.’1Somewhere in between demanding that the other person adjusts to us, or our always adjusting to the other person, is the kind of love that Neptune envisions.
Besides just referring to marriage and close partnership, the 7th house is the way in which we meet society in general. Neptune in the 7th can encounter others from the stance of love, sensitivity and openness, or present a false front which suits any occasion. A number of artists and musicians whose charts I have done have this placement, as well as people who counsel and help others in some way. If Neptune is difficultly aspected, there can be the danger of scandal and problems with public lawsuits. The person may be ‘scapegoated’, that is, openly punished and admonished for what others secretly feel guilty about in themselves.
Neptune in the 8th
If Neptune can’t be at home in the 12th, his next favourite house is that of his close brother Pluto, the 8th. Neptune’s main thrust is the loss of boundaries and separateness – what better place to do this than in the house of sex, sharing and intimacy. And as a means of alleviating Neptune’s perennial divine homesickness, the 8th house’s association with death does the job quite well.
Freud made us aware that many seemingly innocent things can be symbolic of our sexual drive and interests. For instance, if you dream of smoking a cigar, is that really acigar you are thinking of? However, it is also the case that sex itself may be symbolic. With Neptune (or Pisces) in the 8th, sex, rather than just simply being enjoyed for its own sake, is often the means to alleviate other very pressing psychological concerns.
For those with Neptune in this house, sex is a way of merging with other people, and hence transcending the limits of the isolated self. Either through losing their own boundaries or engulfing those of another, they relieve much more than just a physiological tension. Reminiscent of the rites of Dionysus, in the throes of physical love, they satisfy the need to abandon and forget themselves. Sex is also a way of loosening the reins of personal control and responsibility for the self. They are captured and captivated by another; they are carried away by a force more powerful than themselves. It is a form of worship and reverence, a kind of divine seduction, which brings home to them that something exists which is bigger and greater than they are.
With Neptune in the 8th, physical intimacy is also a respite from loneliness, and much of the promiscuity and indiscretion associated with this placement may stem from this motive. Some may also feel that giving themselves sexually is a way of serving, pleasing or even healing others. It can also be a very convenient way of escaping from problems in other areas of the life.
I have seen many cases of people with this placement who are confused about their sexual identities. Neptune is so diffuse, so adaptable, so fluid and so shaped by its container, that they have difficulty knowing exactly what it is they do want. Conversely, problematical aspects to Neptune (from Saturn, for instance) also suggest a fear of letting go – a tension between holding on to boundaries and losing them. Some may even feel the need to transcend their libidinal desires altogether for the sake of channelling these energies in other directions. For others, sex may seem like a disappointment, and not quite as wonderful as it looks in the movies or what they read in books or hear from friends about it. And still others may feel that their way of purification and redemption is through sacrificing a sexual relationship with someone to whom they are strongly attracted. In some instances I have seen, they seemed to always desire and fantasize about people they were not involved with, rather than the person with whom they were engaged in a relationship. Neptune is never that content with what he already has. Besides, if we know a person too well, his or her alien magnetism eventually wears thin.
Many of the same processes apply to the exchange of values between people. Often they hope to gain many material benefits from a partner, but ultimately what is acquired is usually of a much less tangible nature. Strange complications and deceptive circumstances can affect the whole area of the partner’s money and joint finances. At times they may be too influenced or even deceived by other people’s values, or envious about what others own which they don’t. In the end, their greatest satisfaction will come not from accruing other people’s possessions but rather by helping another person to develop his or her own values and resources.
It is advisable that they are as straightforward as possible in business dealings and care should be taken in the selection of business partners. Neptune often brings confusion, and when signing contracts, the two parties should clarify exactly what the agreement is. Economic losses and gains will have an important psychological impact, and ultimately could impel them to find their security and salvation inwardly in values other than the material. In any case, they are well-advised to seek advice before making financial investments and in all issues concerning inheritance and taxation.
When Neptune is in any of the water houses, the person is extremely sensitive to and influenced by undercurrents and feelings in the atmosphere. Depending on the aspects to Neptune, the experience of intangible and non-material forces can operate constructively or destructively (Adolf Hitler had Pluto conjunct Neptune in the 8th). In positive cases, the person will receive guidance and inspiration as if out of nowhere or may be open to valuable instruction through dreams. It is as if they tap into an invisible realm where expanded vision and understanding becomes available just at the times when such broadened awareness is most necessary. For this reason, they can also serve as sources of comfort and inspiration for others who are experiencing crises. However, the psychic openness of this position can manifest in less desirable ways. In a few instances, they may feel ‘possessed’ – as if they have been taken over by something powerful outside of themselves. Sometimes they may receive deceptive or misleading guidance from some other dimension.
Since Neptune wants to go Home, and the 8th is the house of Death, those with this placement might entertain self-destructive fantasies when life gets too tough. These can be acted out through a misuse of drugs or alcohol. (Marilyn Monroe was born with Pisces on the cusp of the 8th – not only the cause of death but all the confusion and uncertainty around it reflect the influence of Pisces there.) Unless Neptune has hard aspects from Saturn, there is usually not a fear of death, since the desire to transcend boundaries is so very strong. In line with this, there will often be an interest in the metaphysical or occult.
Neptune in the 9th
Neptune in the 9th seeks redemption and salvation through a belief system. Those with this placement yearn to merge with something greater than the self through an often devotional adherence to a philosophy, religion, cult or guru figure. There is also an irresistible attraction to anyone or anything which promises the keys to heaven. Normally their philosophy or religion will require some form of sacrifice and relinquishment – of the ego, of their possessions, or of former attachments. Many with this placement will benefit enormously from the following of such doctrines. Others may join very strange, esoteric or ‘cultish’ groups, and lose themselves through these involvements. Some may believe that enlightenment will come if they can perfectly imitate their guru. They fall victim to what is known as ‘the buddha disease’ – dressing, eating and thinking exactly like the master, and forgetting the importance of just being themselves. They mistakenly believe that if they behave like an enlightened being they will become enlightened – forgetting that behaviour is a by-product of consciousness, and not the other way around. In other words, they ‘mood-make’ themselves into believing they are realized. Hard aspects to Neptune in the 9th (especially from the 12th) suggest the possibility of ‘spiritual inflation’ – someone who believes that he or she is God’s messenger or that their own particular cult is the one with a monopoly on the truth.
With Neptune here, there is the possibility of disappointments with philosophical systems. If they are looking for that one thing which will be the answer to everything, then they are liable to disillusionment. In one particular meditation society for which I did a number of the disciples’ charts, many of them had Neptune in the 9th: their guru turned out to be an alcoholic. In general with Neptune, pinning the hopes on anything external to save one, even if it is a very inspired philosophy or belief system, may prove a let-down until what is being sought externally is found within the self.
Neptune in the 9th describes a very open and impressionable mind, a vivid imagination, and an interest in what Maslow called ‘the farther reaches of human nature’. They sense that they could be much more than they already are if they could only find a way to more fully expand and utilize their faculties and potentials.
They may be confused about what direction to take in higher education. In many cases I have observed, there was vagueness and vacillation about which subject to make the major area of focus. Some might believe that education is the answer to everything, or find a professor who is their special ‘guru’. Others could become disillusioned with their university or course of study, or find themselves victimized by the system in some way. A few people I know with this placement incurred drug and alcohol problems while at university.
Keats wrote that he could ‘never feel certain of any truth but from a clear perception of its beauty.’ The idea that ‘beauty is truth, truth beauty’ is a very apt description of one sense of Neptune in the 9th. Similarly, for those with this placement, creative expression might be inspired by religious or transcendental images or subtle dimensions of experience, and they could serve as channels to awaken others to these. The philosophical writer Goethe was born with Neptune in the 9th. Bob Dylan, whose songs inspired a whole generation, was born with Neptune in this house ruling Pisces on the 3rd (communication). Neptune here could also indicate international fame as an actor, artist or musician, as in the case of Marlon Brando, Henri Matisse and Jimi Hendrix.
Neptune will express itself in relation to travel and long journeys. For some, travel will be a means of escape and a way of avoiding something in the immediate environment. Others may make pilgrimages to find enlightenment, or be drawn to certain lands which have a Mecca-like enchantment for them. They might envision a place, go there, and find it is very different from what they imagined. Some may feel a kind of spiritual tie with a country other than their own. Caution should be taken not to be deceived by others while in foreign countries.
If Neptune is difficultly aspected, there could be complications with in-laws, or one who is felt as a responsibility to the person in some way.
Neptune in the 10th (and Pisces on the MC)
Neptune has many different faces in the 10th house of career and standing before the public. One manifestation of Neptune here is in those who find themselves idealized and worshipped by the public in general. In some way, they capture the collective imagination or come to represent a movement or force sweeping through society. There are many interesting examples: for instance, Karl Marx, whose very name evokes a whole philosophy of life and history, and who envisioned an ideal state under communism, was born with Neptune in Sagittarius in the 10th. John F. Kennedy, who as President embodied a new outlook and vision for America and was worshipped as a hero by many, was born with Neptune in Leo there. Assassinated while still in office, Kennedy also came to represent the sacrificial victim side of Neptune. In a sense, both Marx and Kennedy gave up their personal identities to represent and serve something greater than themselves – the collective’s longing for redemption.
Tenth house Neptunes may embody various other principles, anything from representing what is beautiful, stylish and glamorous to that of the outcast and public scandal. Clint Eastwood, who personifies the image of the perfect rugged hero, andBruce Lee, the Kung-Fu master who embodied the graceful victor, were both born with Neptune in Virgo in the 10th. Besides politics and cinema, other Neptunian careers include social work, art, fashion, photography, music, dance, religious work and healing.
However, foggy Neptune in the 10th can indicate vagueness or confusion about which career to pursue. Some will be dissatisfied with the work if it is not felt as all-absorbing and inspirational. A few I have seen have worked very hard and devotedly in return for less recognition or remuneration than they deserved. One man with this placement worked for a large company which did many shady and corrupt deals, and yet he was the only one to be arrested and imprisoned for it. Some will feel that their salvation depends on finding the right work or serving the needs of others. In certain cases, they may be forced to give up their careers because of a greater influence over which they have no control. Again, Neptune nudges us along the path of spiritual growth and expansion in this way, as if we are redeemed and purified by having to let go and sacrifice what we are overly attached to.
If we take the 10th house to represent the mother, then she will probably carry the Neptunian projection. She might have been seen as a martyr or victim, someone who gave up her own identity for the sake of raising the family. In some cases I observed, the mother had artistic or creative potentials which were cut short for these reasons. The child may be guilty about feeling happy if the mother is so frustrated, unfulfilled and miserable, or they could blame themselves for the mother’s condition. Or the mother may be so lover-sensitive and delicate that the child ends up having to mother the mother. Although the desire to serve reflects a purpose in itself, those with Neptune in the 10th may find a connection between their choice of a service vocation later in life and experiences with the mother during childhood.
In other cases, the parent may be seen as the saviour or redeemer or someone so idealized that the child feels unworthy to live up to that image. Perhaps Neptune asked that the mother be let go of and sacrificed for any number of reasons. If the mother leaves, is ill, has to work many hours to make ends meet, or dies, then the child must ‘give up’ the mother, at least in her physical form. Later in life, the child may search for the lost ideal mother, or feel somehow inadequate because he or she was deprived of one. More positively, the mother may represent grace and gentleness, acting as a model of softness and compassion for the child.
Pisces on the MC or in the 10th house is similar to Neptune there.
Neptune in the 11th
The existential psychologist Viktor Frankl believes that the desire to serve and help others doesn’t require a reductionist justification – such as that a person does worthy things because he or she is guilty about something from childhood. Rather, he sees service as a genuine way of giving meaning to life.2In addition, caring for others can be the natural and immediate expression of a feeling of bonding and solidarity with those with whom we share this planet. Neptune in the 11th inspires this kind of altruism for its own sake.
Albert Einstein, born with Neptune here, beautifully summed up the challenge of this placement when he said that ‘our task must be to free ourselves from this prison by widening our circle of compassion to embrace all living creatures.’3Many of those with Neptune in the 11th have a utopian vision and will join groups which promotehumanitarian or social causes. They feel the need to participate with others in bringing their idea of truth, justice or beauty into the world. Galileo, born with Neptune in Gemini in the 11th, undermined the very foundation of the establishment in his search for truth. Alexander Fleming, who developed the life-saving drug penicillin, had Neptune in the 11th ruling healing and caring Pisces on the 10th house of career. Many of those with Neptune in the 11th will take up the cause of the underdog. If some segment of the population is suffering or mistreated, they feel this as deeply as if it is happening to them. Some will be more attracted to secret sects, artistic groups or spiritualistic and psychic circles. If Neptune has many hard aspects, the group may have fine ideals and intentions but somehow never fully bring these to manifestation.
The main thrust of Neptune in the 11th is to abandon the self to the group. Some may look to a particular group or cult as the means to redemption and salvation and make many sacrifices for its sake. In less politically minded people, group activities may simply be a way of escaping from the more mundane routines of life. They could lose themselves in a social whirl, seeking ever more glamorous friends and parties. Or the local pub may be the extent of their group involvement.
If Neptune is well-aspected, friends will be supportive and caring. Likewise, a person with Neptune in the 11th will usually be there to help and nurture associates in difficulty. However, if Neptune has difficult aspects, they could experience disillusionment or deception through friendships. They can easily feel that their ideals of comradeship are betrayed. Some may subtly manipulate a friend by making that person feel sorry for them. Discrimination should be exercised in the right choice of friends or groups – it is easy with Neptune here to abnegate personal responsibility if influenced by a ‘bad’ crowd. Friends may carry the Neptunian projection – ones who are artists, healers, romantic dreamers, or sometimes just off-beat.
Some with this placement may chase a goal which constantly eludes them or even set up a pattern of wanting things it would be impossible to have. Again, through confronting disillusionment in Neptune’s house we are made aware of our limitations and reminded that something greater than us exists which is running the show. However, it is still advisable that they offset a tendency to be vague and vacillating about their direction in life by defining their goals as clearly and realistically as possible.
Neptune in the 12th
Neptune is strong in its own house, where the very best or the very worst qualities of this planet may manifest. Those with this placement will be highly sensitive to undercurrents, movements and unseen forces in the atmosphere. Sometimes they are more aware of these levels than what is actually happening on the surface level of life. Pierre Teilhard de Chardin (Neptune in the 12th in Taurus), the late Jesuit priest who has inspired many people with his mystical vision of all life culminating in an ‘Omega’ point of spiritual union, wrote that awareness can return to the point ‘where the roots of matter disappear from view’.4At times, their uncanny vision can be confusing: they see or are told one thing and yet feel or sense something quite different occurring.
Some may be victimized by their own unconscious – that is, periodically swamped or overwhelmed by emotions and feelings which others have an easier time keeping at bay. Montgomery Clift was born with Neptune in the 12th. He had all the Neptunian acting talent and the glamour that goes with it, but he also suffered from severe guilt and depression he couldn’t control, and consequently turned to drink and drugs as anescape route. A few people I know with this placement have reported experiences in which they felt their ego-boundaries dissolving and their ordinary ‘lensing’ of life go out of focus. For some, this was welcomed as a mystical or peak experience; but for others the experience was accompanied by disarming and frightening sensations of chaos and invasion.
If Neptune is not too adversely aspected, the unconscious mind can serve as a source of guidance and inspiration, allowing access to the ‘inner, wise person’. There is an openness to the archaic memory of earlier forms of evolution and they can draw on this reserve of stored information with startling effect – as if they have wisdom and insight into experiences of which they have had no firsthand knowledge. There may be an interest in the philosophy of karma and reincarnation and possibly the belief that they are in touch with some of their previous lives. Understood properly, this could help them in more meaningfully meeting the present life. However, for some with this placement, dwelling on past lives could be a way of avoiding facing what is in front of them right now. Fantasizing about when they were Cleopatra or Joan of Arc might also add a bit of glamour to an otherwise dull existence, but it remains to be seen to what constructive use they put such beliefs.
Neptune in the 12th can denote very strong escapist tendencies: daydreams or fantasies can swallow them whole, and they might retreat from life by creating their own little worlds in which to live. For most people with this placement, times of seclusion and withdrawal will be necessary in order to re-centre and cleanse themselves of the ‘psychic smog’ which has been absorbed and accumulated from interaction with others.
One extreme of Neptune in the 12th may be those who feel that they have no control whatsoever over what happens to them (what some psychologists call an ‘external locus of control’). While Neptune asks that we acknowledge a greater authority than ourselves, a total denial of personal power and responsibility is not a healthy situation, and is best kept in check wherever this planet is placed. Studies have linked depression and various other forms of psychopathology with people who feel that they have lost the influence to direct their lives.5
Similar to Venus in the 12th, those with Neptune here suffer because the world doesn’t always live up to their expectations of what it could be. While they are hurt by the lack of beauty in the world, it is also possible that their sensitivity to beauty can be a means of their own self-healing. Beauty has a regenerative effect on the psyche. If they can make time in their lives to dwell on a sunset, linger by the sea on a night when the stars are visible, meditate in a chapel while the light shines through a stained glass window, or go to a gallery to view their favourite painting, they can often revitalize their own world-weary psyches. As Piero Ferrucci writes inWhat We May Be,in those moments a victory occurs ‘over discouragement, a positive affirmation against resigning ourselves to the process of crystallization and death.’6In other words, those people with Neptune in the 12th do have a choice:whether to see beauty or not.
Beauty also has a self-transcending and revelatory power – opening Neptune in the 12th to new worlds and possibilities which others may not be able to glimpse. Taking responsibility to look for beauty in life will not miraculously erase all their problems, but it can lighten their load and balance out a tendency to err on the side of dissatisfaction. Teilhard de Chardin (Neptune in Taurus in the 12th) also wrote that the aim of evolution is ‘ever more perfect eyes in a world in which there is always more to see.’7
Performing service is another way of freeing the self from pain and unhappiness, and giving meaning to life. Again, some common sense is required: some with this placement may throw themselves totally into other people’s lives as a way of avoiding their own. Nonetheless, Neptune in the 12th could do very effective work within hospitals or institutions. Others may be found employed in museums, libraries and art galleries which protect and preserve the wisdom, beauty and riches of past and present.
Those with Neptune in the 12th might meditate on Jung’s idea that certain problems in life can ‘never be solved, but only outgrown’. Some new interest or vision arises and through this widening of view the insoluble problem loses its urgency. On one level we are caught in a storm, but viewing it from a different level shifts our perspective – like being on a mountaintop viewing the storm in the valley. The thunderstorm is still there and still has relevance, but we are now above it.8Those with Neptune in the 12th will have to learn to accept the good with the bad, the perfect with the imperfect, and the beautiful with the ugly. It helps if they can remember and reflect on what is known as Wittgenstein’s dictum: ‘The solution to the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of the problem.’9
Notes – Chapter 261. Ferguson, p. 435.2. Yalom, p. 444.3. Einstein cited in Russell, p. 129.4. Teilhard de Chardin cited in Ferguson, p. 201.5. Yalom p.2626. Ferrucci, p. 188.7. Teilhard de Chardin cited in Ferguson, p. 71.8. Jung cited by Jacobi inThe Psychology of C.G.Jung, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1968, pp. 134-5.9. Wittgenstein cited by Yalom, p. 482.

