The Twelve Houses

27.PLUTO AND SCORPIO THROUGH THE HOUSES

Like Uranus and Neptune, Pluto is another ‘de-structuring’ principle, inexorably pushing life on, and clearing away old forms to make way for the new. Similar to a snake shedding a skin, something pushes at us from deep within, impels us to move beyond old or outworn phases of life and leads the way to further growth and evolution. Eventually the new will become the old and that, too, will have to be relinquished for yet another phase to follow.
Pluto and Neptune in particular, both underworld gods, share certain similarities in that they each subversively undermine our old frameworks, forcing us to put our hands up and surrender. And yet, they differ dramatically in the way they do this. Like termites or woodworm eating away at the foundations of a house, Neptune slowly dissolves the rigidities of the old structure. With Pluto, however, the roof caves in on us, landing like a ton of bricks upon our heads. Tougher than Neptune, Pluto represents a growing pressure which gradually builds up to a climax, and then finishes us off. While Neptune coaxes us to change by giving us a sense that we can be cleansed and purified through sacrifice and suffering, Plutomakes surethat we let go by obliterating the old form entirely, until there is nothing left. Demanding that a cycle end and a new one begins, Pluto leaves us with little choice other than to change or die.
One of the oldest known recorded myths, ‘The Descent of Inanna’ (beautifully recounted in Sylvia Brinton Perera’s bookThe Descent to the Goddess)describes the workings of Pluto in a house very clearly. Inanna is the goddess of the heavens, joyful, radiant and alive. Ereshkigal, whose name means ‘the lady of the great place below’, is her dark sister living in the underworld, and represents an earlier, matriarchal form of Pluto. Ereshkigal’s husband has just died and Inanna decides to visit the underworld to attend his funeral. But instead of receiving Inanna gracefully, Ereshkigal greets her sister with a dark and poisonous stare and subjects Inanna to the same treatment that all souls must undergo when they enter Ereshkigal’s realm. There are seven gates or portals leading to the underworld and at each one whoever passes must strip off a garment or jewel. The decorously regaled Inanna must pass through each of these seven portals, removing her robes and gems in the process so that by the time she faces her sister in the deepest underworld, she is completely naked and ‘bowed low’ before her. In other words, Pluto-Ereshkigal strips us of those things with which we have adorned ourselves, those things from which we have attained our sense of identity and ‘aliveness’. Even though a highly unpleasant and demeaning experience, this is, the myth tells us, a destructive force that we must respect and bow to. After all, it is the work of a goddess, a divinity representing or serving some higher organizing centre or power. The house containing Pluto is where we may have to meet and pay homage in this way to Ereshkigal – a dark goddess, but a goddess nonetheless.
Ereshkigal then kills Inanna and hangs her on a meat-hook in the underworld: the beautiful and high-minded goddess of the heavens is left to rot. Similarly, the house Pluto inhabits is where we may have to face what is rotten in us. It is in this domain thatwe encounter the dark and undifferentiated sides of our nature – our overwhelming passions and obsessions, our lust for power, our raw sensuality, our jealousy, envy, greed, hate, rage and savagery, and our primal wounds and pains. We cannot be whole until these are brought to the surface, transmuted and properly reintegrated into the psyche.
This sounds unpleasant, and it often is, but we must remember that Pluto was also the god of buried treasure and hidden wealth. Through the upheaval he brings, disowned parts of ourselves banished to the unconscious, and therefore out of reach, are reclaimed for conscious use and disposition. In this way, we reconnect to lost energy and also gain access to untapped resources and strengths into the bargain.
Inanna does not remain trapped in the underworld forever. Knowing she was going somewhere dangerous, she made previous arrangements for her release in case she found herself in trouble down there. Similarly, Pluto-Ereshkigal may stew us in our own juices, but we must also have the good sense not to remain stuck only in that which is loathsome or painful in life. Pluto breaks us down, but like Inanna we must return again to the upper world and the everyday functioning of life – hopefully with a greater degree of self-knowledge, wisdom and wholeness.
Inanna escapes from the underworld through the help of two little androgynous men called ‘the Mourners’. Small and unobtrusive, they slip into the underworld unnoticed and approach Ereshkigal, who herself is in great pain. Not only has her husband died, but she is also pregnant and having a difficult birth. In other words, something has died, but something is also being born. Instead of chastising Ereshkigal for the awful death of Inanna, the Mourners move very close to her and commiserate with her condition. Practising a kind of Rogerian therapy, they allow her the space to moan and bitch, mirroring back her woes and pains. The Mourners have been taught to affirm the life-force even when it expresses itself through misery, darkness and suffering. So grateful to be accepted in this way, Ereshkigal offers them any gift they wish. They ask that Inanna be returned to life, and Ereshkigal obligingly revives her. Inanna returns to the upper world, transformed and renewed, bringing with her fresh life for the crops and vegetation. Ereshkigal-Pluto destroys life, but also can create new life as well.
What can we learn from Pluto’s house? Firstly, rather than understanding pain and crisis as a stigma or pathology, as something bad to be avoided at all costs, we can see these phases as part of a larger process leading to renewal and rebirth. Secondly, we learn that we cannot master or transform what we condemn, deny or repress – which is exactly how we normally deal with anything unpleasant. Instead, the Mourners hold the key: paying attention to and accepting Ereshkigal-Pluto as part of life allows the healing magic to work.
Something else is gained from being destroyed, from losing what has been precious, and from the disintegration of that which has once served as our source of identity and vitality. Through being stripped of everything, we are reminded of that part of us which is still there after all else has been taken away. We discover something deep within the self that sustains us even through the loss of former ego-attachments. This is the gift we retrieve in the house of Pluto: the knowledge of something in ourselves which is indestructible. Pluto releases the enduring from the merely transitory – and we are reborn with a sense of being alive which is unconditional and not contingent on the external or relative, phenomenal world providing us with certain ‘props’.
Obviously, wherever Pluto sets up his altar in the chart, the affairs of that house are not to be taken at face value. Complexity and intrigue are the watchwords here. InPluto’s domain, we have to search for hidden causes and underlying, unconscious motivations. The isolated ego is not interested in supervising its own destruction. Pluto is the henchman of a deeper, core Self which employs this planet to break down the ego-boundaries and release more of who we really are. As Jung writes, ‘There are higher things than the ego’s will, and to these one must bow.’
Pluto deals in extremes, and we are capable of evincing the very worst or the very best of human nature in the area of life in which he is placed. When the omnipotence of the ego is called into question, we are terrified of being destroyed: accordingly we attempt to protect ourselves by ruthlessly or treacherously controlling what happens in Pluto’s house. Not even knowing why, we may be driven to act compulsively and obsessively. And yet, in that same sphere, by acknowledging and serving a mysterious force more powerful than ourselves, we can potentially discover and exhibit our greatest strength, nobility, purpose and dedication. Not only are we significantly changed by what happens in that area, but it is also where we can act as a catalyst or trigger for the transformation of others. For some, the very force which moves history may overtake and work through them in Pluto’s domain.
Scorpio on the cusp or contained within a house is similar in interpretation to Pluto there. The house with Pluto in it will influence any house where Scorpio is found. For instance, former President Nixon had Pluto in the 10th house and Scorpio on the cusp of the 3rd. A secretive, plotting and determined mind (Scorpio on the 3rd) would stop at nothing to achieve his obsessive need for power and standing in his career (Pluto in the 10th), and eventually brought about his own destruction and subsequent rebirth.
Pluto in the 1st
With Pluto in the 1st, an individual’s personal style, destiny, and way of approaching life need to include and recognize the nature of this planet. Above all, Pluto is both a creator and a destroyer, and those with Pluto in the 1st will express either one or both of these sides. It is better if they recognize their own destructive urges, otherwise they may unconsciously provoke events, other people, or their own bodies to act as agents of ‘de-structuring’ for them. In other words, one way or another the underworld realm of hidden thoughts, feelings and motivations must be reckoned with – they cannot escape untouched just trying to live on the surface level of life.
Those with Pluto here might employ their destructive urges for any number of reasons. For instance, if they feel that their progress or evolution is blocked or impeded by certain structures in their lives (such as a job or a relationship, etc.), then they will remove these to make room for new possibilities and further growth. If they don’t acknowledge their frustration and do something positive about it, then they might act in such a way as to force the other person to break up the relationship or a boss to fire them from a job they don’t like. As a general rule, it is dishonest and not to our advantage to displace responsibility for any 1st house planet onto other people or events.
In some cases, they may employ their destructive powers because there is something ‘out there’ making them feel vulnerable and endangering their sense of safety and security. Their philosophy in this instance is ‘Get rid of it before it gets rid of me’, and they have the capacity to deal ruthlessly with life if necessary. There is a part of them which will promulgate almost anything for their own survival; or they may act like the scorpion who if cornered will sting itself to death first rather than giving something elsethe chance to defeat it. The primitive and instinctive drives of the nature will have to be ‘owned’ and accepted before being transformed or rechannelled. Some may swing to extremes and actually over-identify with the dark side of life, believing that they are ‘badness incarnate’. In these cases, there is the need to discover that they are not just an Ereshkigal, but that they have a lighter and more worthy side (Inanna) to them as well.
An interesting example is how Copernicus, the father of modern astronomy, used his 1st house Pluto’s destructive energy. In establishing that the Earth actually revolved around the Sun rather than vice versa, he utterly destroyed a basic paradigm on which a whole era’s view of life was based.
As can be expected, those with Pluto in the 1st will periodically orchestrate sweeping changes in their lifestyles. They might dramatically alter their physical appearance at some stage – such as shedding five stone or dressing in a radically different way. They might, usually when Pluto is triggered by transit or progression, drastically shift their outward or inner focus on life, as if they die and are reborn another person. For example Richard Alpert (Pluto in Cancer in the 1st) was a Harvard professor who after experimenting with hallucinogenic drugs went off to India and changed his name to Baba Ram Dass.
If Pluto is close to the Ascendant, the birth itself might have entailed a crucial life and death struggle. I have seen a few cases where the birth nearly brought about the death of the mother. Placed anywhere in the 1st, Pluto also suggests early years marked by difficulties and traumas, impressing on them that life is a struggle. Trusting the world will be a problem because their experience early in life has been that it is not necessarily on their side. Also, if they are so ruthless to survive, might not others be as well? Walking around anticipating disaster, they feel they must protect and barricade themselves against destruction and doom. For this reason, they are sometimes loners, who find it difficult to blend in or co-operate with others. For some, their need for power stems from this mistrust of life – if they are not in control, then terrible things might happen. Warding off evil can also be the root of obsessive-compulsive character patterns.
In Greek mythology, Pluto almost always stayed in the underworld; those few times he appeared on the surface, he wore a helmet which made him invisible. Likewise, those with Pluto in the 1st may protect themselves by being secretive and covert. If they show too much of what is happening inside, this may give others power over them. For this reason, they often appear mysterious and aloof. Bobby Fischer, born with Pluto in Leo in the 1st ruling Scorpio on the 5th (games and hobbies), effectively used the cunning and tactical side of this placement in gaining the title of World Chess Champion.
When those with Pluto in the 1st do come out and risk opening up, they do it with a serious intensity. Occasionally, suppressed feelings will erupt, inclining them to act in extreme ways. If Pluto is near to the Ascendant, their eyes may be keen and penetrating as if they are seeing deeply into what is happening around them. Some exude a powerful sexuality. Usually they have tremendous endurance, and can dedicate themselves one-pointedly to a cause or endeavour. Their will-power is enormous and they may battle between using this power constructively or destructively. Their lives may be a story of many ups-and-downs as if they need to experience both the best and worst of all possibilities.

Pluto in the 2nd
Like Uranus and Neptune in a house, Pluto implores the individual to probe more deeply into the meaning of that sphere and does not allow life to be lived in an ordinary or uncomplicated fashion in that area. Issues around the acquisition of money and possessions, and the quest for security in general, cannot be taken at face value if Pluto is placed in the 2nd.
With Pluto here, it is necessary to discover the underlying motivations which propel such strong and passionate feelings about money and security. For some, money is imbued with the power of a deity, which determines if they live or die. Money and power may be accrued as a way of controlling others, or as a safety gauge for those who feel that the world is out to destroy them. Material success may be sought as a way of enhancing their sexual attractiveness. Some may see amassing possessions as a way of extending their territory of influence and thereby regaining a sense of their lost infantile omnipotence. Or if they have been put down and belittled as children, then acquiring great wealth and status may be the way of proving their worth to the world.
Pluto sets up his altar of destruction in whatever house he occupies. Consequently, those with this placement may harbour a fear that something lurks in the shadows which threatens to wipe out their resources and possessions. They might hoard money in an attempt to counter-effect this danger. Pluto brings extremes, and they might experience both ends of the scale of poverty and wealth. If they have become too centred or identified with their bank accounts, cars or big homes, Pluto may destroy these external forms of self-definition, stripping away outer attachments or trappings so that they can discover who they are from inside themselves. They may even unconsciously provoke such a catastrophe so that an inner and more permanent sense of worth and security can be found.
The house position of Pluto shows where we might make a significant contribution to society. In the 2nd, the person may be in possession of certain skills and abilities which could influence and shape the world in some way. The innate resources and values to be developed are those of unusually deep perception, a powerful conviction, and an ability to be decisive in times of crises. Pluto can cut out and eliminate what is not essential, and thereby purify and streamline what it touches. Those with Pluto in the 2nd can take something which appears to be of little value and transform it into an object of worth.
Their incomes and sources of self-worth could be obtained through professions associated with Pluto: research work, the psychological, parapsychological and medical fields, mining and underground work, detective and undercover activities, antiques and refurbishing, etc.
Pluto in the 3rd
Like Uranus or Neptune in this house, Pluto in the 3rd aims to transcend the ordinary limits of the mind or intellect. Those with this placement often have a deep, penetrating and incisive mind able to ‘laser through’ to the heart of any matter. There could be an interest in extra-sensory perception or a desire to expose and freely talk about subjects which others find taboo (such as sex and death). Their minds are well-suited to any form of research or depth studies. Some might seek knowledge for the power and mastery it gives over others and the environment. Occasionally, they give birth to ideas which could have a transforming effect on society. The Protestant ReformationistMartin Luther is reputed to have been born with Pluto in Libra in the 3rd. Mary Baker Eddy, the founder of the Christian Science Church, also had Pluto in this house.
They may have a certain power with words. William Butler Yeats, the Irish Nobel Prize-winning poet who had a deep mystical slant on life, was born with Pluto in the 3rd ruling Scorpio on the 9th house of philosophy. (The poet Robert Browning, the author of so many famous and immortal lines, also has enduring Pluto in the 3rd.) However, Pluto’s strength can be used treacherously as well, and those with this placement are often known for their cutting tongues and acute sensitivity to where another person’s weakness lies. Negative moods could creep up and they can be overwhelmed by obsessive thoughts, as if their own minds betray them. Their thoughts can turn very destructive, and some will be afraid to speak because of a fear of what might come out. Others hide what is going on inside them in case exposing themselves would render them too vulnerable.
The 3rd house covers the early environment and the growing-up years. As children, we all have difficulty distinguishing between having wished for something and the belief that we have actually done the deed. For instance, if a little boy is angry at his sister for getting more attention than him, he may entertain a passing thought that he wishes she were dead. Let’s say that the next day his sister falls out of a tree and breaks her leg. The boy in question might equate the negative wish he had with the accident and therefore believe that his bad thoughts caused it to happen. Taking whole or part blame for it, he will walk around guilty and afraid of being found out and punished for his evil doings. As we grow older we realize we are not so omnipotent, but those with Pluto in the 3rd may still harbour fears and guilt about the power of their thoughts and the bad things they made or make happen around them. Secret sins such as these can torment a child or adolescent with Pluto in the 3rd, and he or she may be terrified to tell anyone else about it. And where there is shame and guilt, anger and rage are not far away. Obviously, parents of children with Pluto in the 3rd should try to create an environment in which the child feels safe to talk about what is going on in his or her mind, rather than allowing thoughts and feelings to fester underneath too long.
The early environment may have been experienced by those with this placement as threatening or non-life-supporting and could leave the impression that they have to continually guard themselves against others. They will not easily forget a wrong-doing and may hold on to resentment for a very long time. The relationship with siblings is usually complex and ridden with undercurrents of sexuality, competition and intrigue. This placement often indicates difficulties with neighbours and problems with early schooling. For some, being sent away to boarding school is a major upheaval and felt as a kind of banishment or punishment for some imagined transgression.
Even short journeys can be harassing. They may arrive at a friend’s for a quiet weekend in the country to discover they have stepped into the plot of an Agatha Christie thriller.
Those with Pluto in the 3rd are powerful on the mental plane and if they hold a certain attitude towards another person, they can ‘box’ the person in to such a degree that he or she inevitably acts out the projection. Therefore if they want someone’s behaviour to change, they might try altering the context in which they are viewing that person. It is a basic fact of life that attention carries energy.

Pluto in the 4th (and Scorpio on the IC)
Complexes, traumas and unresolved issues from early childhood often seethe below the level of conscious awareness if Pluto is in the 4th house. They may try to cut off their deeper feelings altogether, exerting rigid control over themselves as away of defending themselves against these raw emotions. And yet there is always the sense of something dangerous lurking underneath which could overwhelm them in the end. For some, their whole life is built around suppressing what’s down there, and in this respect they are dominated by those very things they are trying to keep at bay. Finding the self is like peeling an onion – layer upon layer has to be removed to reach the core. More than any other placement, this is the deep-sea diver who must plunge into the depths of the personal unconscious, bringing hidden complexes to light so that they can be examined, worked on and hopefully transmuted.
These complexes probably stem from their experiences in the early home environment (the family of origin) and may resurface later on in their private and domestic lives. Since the home sphere is where they feel most vulnerable, they may attempt to manipulate and control those around them so that nobody slips up and detonates their inner time-bomb. Obviously, this does not lend itself to the most relaxed of home atmospheres, in which there are probably many unwritten rules about what is or isn’t allowed to be said or done. Wherever Pluto is in the chart is where we fear our own destruction. In the 4th, the bogeyman lurks under the bed, in the wardrobe, or stares at them from across the breakfast table. It is like living by the side of Mount Vesuvius.
Those with Pluto in the 4th might experience major reorientations in their lives through upheavals in the domestic sphere or the collapse of the family structure altogether. Although this is hardly likely to be easy, they have the capacity to rise out of the rubble reborn, hopefully wiser and with greater self-understanding. On the positive side, Pluto in the 4th is a good indication of strong regenerative powers and the ability to rebuild the self after any kind of breakdown. The survival instinct runs deep and resources they didn’t know they had come to the fore at the time of crisis.
If we take the 4th house to represent the father, he could have been experienced as exceptionally powerful, dark or threatening. Children with this placement may be keenly aware of the father’s passion, sexuality, frustrations and pent-up rage. Sometimes it is the death, disappearance or psychological distance of the father which affects them strongly. More positively, he could represent someone with great courage, fortitude and creative potency.
The 4th house describes how we end things, and with Pluto or Scorpio there, endings are often final and irrevocable. There may be the need to dramatically finish certain phases in the life, or cut themselves off from people or places to which they have previously been tied. The Duke of Windsor, who abdicated the crown and, in that sense, his rightful inheritance, was born with Pluto conjunct Neptune in Gemini in the 4th.
Those with Pluto in the 4th may have a love and reverence of nature, an almost primeval tie with the earth and its mysteries. Attempting to fathom the secrets of nature, there may be an interest in oceanography and deep-sea diving, archaeology, psychology or metaphysics.
Some will be able to transmute their inner struggles and emotional churnings into creative expression. For instance, according to the time given by his father, Mozart was born with Pluto in the 4th. He composed some of his best works in periods of depression and illness. Through psychological exploration, deep inner reflection andmeditation, and the nurturance of seeds of self-knowledge, those with this placement may mature into extremely wise and radiant sources of strength, inspiration and guidance for others. The Greek god Pluto was in charge of buried treasure, and those with this planet in the 4th just need to dig for it.
Scorpio on the IC or contained within the 4th house is similar in interpretation to Pluto there.
Pluto in the 5th
The key to working with Pluto in the 5th is the development of a healthy sense of one’s own power and worth. Everyone has the need to feel important and special in some area of life, but with Pluto in Leo’s natural domain, this could become an obsession. Excessive pride and an inflated self-opinion could bring many problems to those with this placement. However, too weak an ego, or too little a sense of their importance, value and effectiveness can also be the source of difficulties. In either case, they may resort to extreme gestures to prove their potency. Barbra Streisand, the singer-actress-writer-director whose drive, energy and apparent abrasiveness rub many people up the wrong way, was born with Pluto in Leo in the 5th.
As children, we feel that we are more likely to be protected by our parents if they find us enchanting and captivating. Therefore being somebody special is linked in our minds with warding off doom and disaster. For those with Pluto in the 5th, the need for love, approval and power may still be mixed up with the survival instinct. Barbra Streisand’s father died when she was very young, and perhaps she felt that she was not special enough to keep him. Later, she felt neglected by her mother and new stepfather, which would have added more fuel to the fire already raging in her 5th house. Obviously, as in her case, this dynamic may spur some people on to high achievements. For others, it could mean bitter disappointment at the lack of their recognition and worth and angry resentment towards those who appear more successful. However, failing to win the status they seek may provide the impetus for further self-evaluation and self-knowledge.
For children with Pluto in the 5th, the sandbox could be the place where they scale new heights, or the scene for traumatic experiences. It just can’t be any old castle, but must somehow express from the depths of their feelings who they really are, complete with moat and secret chambers. Mars threw sand in the face of his friend who did a better castle; Pluto might go a step further – accidentally on purpose kicking over the rival’s castle, provoking a fight and breaking the friendship. It may be days or weeks later before Pluto returns to the sandbox at all. (It’s reputed that when Ms Streisand’s filmYentldidn’t receive the recognition she felt it deserved from the Academy of Motion Pictures, she boycotted the ceremonies that year altogether.)
Later in life, creative self-expression may still entail working through traumas, blocks and difficulties. However, the problems encountered serve to bring unconscious patterns and unfinished issues from early life to the surface where there is more chance of resolving them. Some with this placement will be able to give expression to creative works of great power which can awaken and transform others. Hermann Hesse, born with Pluto in the 5th ruling Scorpio on the cusp of the 11th, comes to mind. He is also reported to have struggled with bouts of depression and alcoholism. Nietzsche had Pluto in Aries in the 5th ruling Scorpio on the cusp of the 12th and, according to Rodden (Astro-Data II: The American Book of Charts), spent ten lonely years writing his major works. After completing these books, he died a year later, alone and insane.
For both men and women, this position of Pluto suggests that bringing children into the world could have a life-changing effect. Although this is generally the case for anyone who has children, the issues of parenting are somehow more far-reaching with Pluto in this house. For many men with this placement, becoming a father for the first time heralds a traumatic awakening to the fact that they are no longer the ‘eternal youth’ themselves. For a woman, it could indicate difficulty with child-bearing and she is wise to look after herself with extra care during the pregnancy. Issues around abortion and miscarriages are not uncommon with Pluto in the 5th. Even when an interrupted pregnancy cannot be helped, there is still the need to grieve and mourn for what is lost. As with Neptune in the 5th, the anguish incurred in such circumstances is more productively utilized if some meaning or purpose can be attached to the experience.
Parents with this placement may meet their own dark and subterranean sides through the behaviour of their children. The parent with Pluto in the 5th may over-control or try to dominate a child not purely out of a desire to love and protect, but because the parent is frightened that the child, if left to its own devices, might do something which is untoward or personally threatening. If this is the case, the children may have to break radically with the parent in order to establish more freely their own identities. In the long run, it is far better that the parent examine his or her own fears and complexes and what has given rise to them, rather than attempt to control life as a way of avoiding confronting these. Having said all this, I have seen many instances of Pluto in the 5th where the parent-child relationship is handled with strength and dignity.
With Pluto in the 5th, romantic pursuits may become entangled with the power drive and some degree of sexual compulsiveness. Those with this placement may fear the intensity of their sexual drive and try to inhibit it altogether or find ways to transmute libidinal expression into channels which they deem more acceptable. Others may derive a sense of potency through sexual conquest and attract love affairs which involve power conflicts, dramas and intrigues. Carried to extremes, they could use other people too much to prove their own worth – a form of psychological rape. True mutuality, sharing and respect for another person’s integrity are the lessons to be learned if Pluto or Scorpio is in the 5th.
Pluto in the 6th
The 6th house is the meeting point of body and psyche, the point of connection between what we are inside and the forms with which we surround ourselves. Those with Pluto in the 6th can explore this connection in great depth.
When an underworld deity like Pluto sets up his altar in the 6th house of health, then physical illness cannot be taken at face value. In mythology, Pluto rarely came above ground, but in one instance it was to seek healing for a wound. In sickness, accumulated poisons and toxins come to the surface which need to be eliminated in order for the body to function healthily again. The root causes of these problems, not just the outward symptoms, need to be treated if Pluto is in the 6th, or else the trouble may just recur at another time.
In short, those with Pluto in the 6th should explore the possibility that illness is an indication of problems elsewhere in the lives than just the body. It is a well-known fact that psychological issues play a part in aggravating a disease. Noxious agents are always present in the system, but whether we develop an illness depends on our ability to resist these. Negative thoughts and feelings, conscious or unconscious, take their tollon the body by weakening the system’s natural defences, making us more susceptible to what we can normally combat. People with Pluto in the 6th may complain that their bodies have betrayed them when they fall ill, when in actual fact the body has only revealed that there is something awry in their mental and emotional states. The good news is – as the authors ofGetting Well Againpoint out – that if people can make themselves psychosomatically ill, they can also become ‘psychosomatically healthy’.1By examining their beliefs and feelings, those with Pluto in the 6th can move in the direction of altering not just their health but their whole lives. The knowledge available to these people is the direct comprehension that the mind, body and emotions function as an integrated system.
Functioning as a unified whole means that every little thing in life has significance in relation to everything else. For those with Pluto in the 6th then, simple, everyday routines in life can take on great importance. Just choosing what clothes to wear in the morning or keeping the house clean can be fraught with great anxiety if Pluto is poorly aspected. They may contrive compulsive rituals in executing these tasks as if by doing them in this way they are warding off evil and destruction.
On the positive side, they have the capacity to work in a dedicated and undistracted fashion with their total will behind a job. However, they can also take the need to be conscientious, responsible, practical and productive, and turn these into obsessions as if their very survival depended on these qualities. The desire to do a job right is felt with intensity, conviction and passion. Obviously, this zeal can make them difficult to work alongside with. They may be unduly irritable and critical of others who do not share their style and approach. Relationships with co-workers may be marred by uncomfortable undercurrents, sexual innuendoes, betrayals, treachery and intrigues. Power struggles could develop and they may resent and feel threatened by anyone in authority, unconsciously wishing to dethrone those in a higher position. If those with Pluto in the 6th are in the position of authority, the whole question of how they dispense power over subordinates comes sharply into focus.
Often there is the desire to improve on already existing methods of work. Compulsively searching for flaws, sweeping changes can be made in the name of increased efficiency. Their work must be deeply engaging and consuming, otherwise they will lose interest, and possibly ‘set up’ situations which force them to leave the job for another. Some may become ill to free themselves from work they abhor. Others may lose jobs because of conditions beyond their control – such as economic recession and redundancy. While the loss of employment can have a serious effect on their psychological well-being, examining the emotions and feelings which are brought to the surface by such contingencies could lead to greater self-knowledge and further growth.
Employment may be in a field which is ‘Plutonian’ by nature: undercover or detective work, mining, careers in psychology, medicine or psychiatry, or work involving nuclear energy. Taking one meaning of Pluto literally, some could work in junkyards, cemeteries or funeral parlours. Quite a few people I have seen with Pluto in the 6th are involved in various forms of neo-Reichian body-work.
In some cases, an accident or illness may produce irrevocable damage. The French artist, Henri Toulouse-Lautrec, who was deformed as a result of a riding accident, was born with Pluto in Taurus in the 6th. But even if we are born with severe limiting restrictions, we are still responsible for the attitude we adopt to the handicap: we can live a life of bitter regret or find ways to give meaning to the life despite or maybe even because of it.

Pluto in the 7th
The Greek sovereign of the underworld was only seen to leave his kingdom for the upper world twice: once to heal a wound inflicted on him by Hercules, and once to abduct Persephone into his realm. Similarly, the workings of Pluto can be observed most clearly in illness and in the sphere of close relationships.
With Pluto in the 7th, it is in the area of partnerships that Pluto is encountered. Rather than viewing marriage or close union as merely a ‘happily ever after’ affair, it is wiser for those with this placement to understand relationships as catalysts or agents for personal transformation, growth and change.
Liz Greene says of Pluto in this house that ‘the entry into the underworld comes through somebody else.’ In other words, relationships will plunge them into deep emotional complexes which have lurked in the recesses of the psyche from as far back as early childhood (or even further, if one believes in karma and reincarnation). Through issues connected to partnership, parts of the nature which have been buried, repressed or kept under control by the ego will erupt messily into the everyday life. After the blast, there is the task of putting themselves back together again, hopefully with greater awareness and understanding of their own complexities.
If they are not wholly in touch with their own darker or undifferentiated sides, then they may project these qualities onto the partner. If they have not acknowledged their potential for ruthlessness, treachery, betrayal, jealousy, envy and possessiveness, they seem to attract or constellate such traits in other people. Again, the nature of life is towards wholeness: if we are not living that wholeness, then the outside brings it to us.
Wherever Pluto falls in the chart is where the god of death and destruction can be found. Some with this placement sense their own proclivities for destructiveness in the area of relationships and consequently live in fear that others might be capable of the same kind of behaviour. Or they may totally disown their own destructive energy by just attributing it to the other person. Because of a nagging apprehension that sooner or later the other person is going to disrupt the relationship, they have difficulty trusting the partner or feeling safe in a union. Attempting to avert such a catastrophe, they may try to dominate, possess and control the partner. Unfortunately, such behaviour often serves to drive the other person away, thereby bringing about the situation which they most dreaded. As in the case with Pluto in any house, the deity which brings the illness is also the one who brings the cure. To clean up the mess that our own unconscious complexes land us in, Pluto hands us a shovel and says ‘Start digging’. In the process we may even unearth some very good reasons why it all had to happen that way.
I have seen many instances where those with Pluto in the 7th wanted to end a relationship but were afraid to do it for various reasons. Invariably, they somehow provoked the other person to do it for them.
Some may meet Pluto in the 7th through the death of a partner. If the partnership was a close, good one, then picking up the pieces after such a misfortune is a slow, gradual process with many phases. But wherever Pluto is, the capacity to rise again, like the Phoenix out of the ashes, is also present; although Pluto may teach them to be more careful next time about deriving their identities wholly from something external to the self. Even if the relationship was fraught with fights and bitterness, the loss of a partner through death can still be devastating – especially if the person feels partially responsible for what has happened, or the partner died before pressing interpersonal issues could be resolved. It will be important for the remaining partner to do what heor she can to work through these feelings; otherwise any later relationship may be tainted by them. Pluto’s house is easily haunted.
Pluto is a planet of extremes and in this sense it is oddly placed in the house which is concerned with balance, sharing and learning co-operation. The issue of who has the power in the relationship is brought sharply into focus. Some will give all their power over to the other person, as if they want to be swallowed up by the relationship. Others will not feel safe unless they are the ones in charge. In either case, the balance of power is unevenly shared and lessons of true mutuality are still to be learned. Sooner or later one or the other of the partners may feel the need to break free in order to grow beyond the constrictions of such an arrangement.
In many cases I have seen, those with Pluto in the 7th actually have difficulty eliminating or letting go of a relationship. For some, this evinces a kind of loyalty which is determined to keep working at it. For others, their identity may be so tied up in the partnership that to lose it would be like death. In mythology, Pluto, compared to the other gods, was a relatively constant husband to Persephone, and was only unfaithful twice. In the first instance, he developed a mad passion for the nymph Minthe, but in his wild pursuit of her, he accidentally crushed her underfoot. (It is possible that those with Pluto in the 7th can actually destroy a relationship because of their own intensity about it.) In the second case, he abducted one of the daughters of Oceanus into his kingdom, where she lived until she died a natural death.
Pluto may require the complete breakdown and elimination of an existing relationship to allow for the continuing individuation of each party. On the other hand, however, Pluto also suggests that a relationship can endure a number of mini-deaths and rebirths, coming up stronger each time, and lasting many, many years.
Those with Pluto in the 7th have the ability to help others through painful times of crises and transition. Some may have a profound influence on society in general. Two examples illustrate the social face of Pluto in the 7th. The Fascist Italian dictator, Mussolini, had Pluto here ruling the 12th house of collective movements. By contrast, Betty Friedan, the indefatigable women’s liberation leader, has Pluto in the 7th ruling Scorpio on both the 11th and 12th house cusps. This house placement of Pluto is also useful in the charts of lawyers, healers, counsellors and psychologists.
Pluto in the 8th
In a poem entitled ‘In Tenebris’, Thomas Hardy wrote, ‘If a way to the Better there be, it exacts a full look at the Worst.’ He might have been thinking of Pluto in the 8th when he came up with these lines.
According to Freud, we are born with certain drives which push at us from within. But due to internal or external pressures, we become anxious about the expression of these impulses and set up defence mechanisms to restrict them. Two of these in particular – drives of sex and aggression – give us a great deal of trouble. If they are denied altogether, they often erupt explosively in compulsive, uncontrollable behaviour. However, if we allow them free rein, there is the danger that they will control us rather than the other way around. The challenge for those with Pluto in the 8th is to explore and accept these drives and yet find ways to channel them purposefully and productively in the sphere of interpersonal relationships.
Sex and aggression are normally associated with the planet Mars. They appear to be endogenous, instinctive impulses which are a necessary part of our biological heritage.The value of sex is obvious in reproduction, and aggression or power is necessary for growth and mastery of life. Sexual arousal is, in many ways, akin to the physiology of anger. In fact, Kinsey reported fourteen physiological changes which are common to both sexual arousal and anger.2Even from our own experience we may know how often love turns to anger, or what starts out as an argument finishes up as an orgasm. But when we start talking about either repressing these drives or mastering them, we leave the field of Mars and enter the domain of Pluto.
Some people with Pluto in the 8th successfully master and skilfully guide their libidinal energy into impressive achievements. Winston Churchill, Leonardo da Vinci, Galileo and Bismarck – all men of exceptional power and drive – were born with Pluto in this house. This placement also denotes tremendous strength and resources in crises as well as the stamina to lead other people through difficult times. Besides reorienting their own use of power on the physical, mental, social, emotional or spiritual levels, they possess the ability to drastically alter the lives of those they come in contact with.
However, looking throughAstro-Data II: The American Book of Charts,three other examples of Pluto in this house stand out. One is John Gacy, with Pluto in the 8th ruling Scorpio on the 12th and 1st. According to Rodden, he was considered an ‘upstanding’ and salient member of the community until he was indicted for the ‘sadistic sexual assault and murder of thirty-two young men and boys’ (buried, aptly for this placement, in his cellar). Albert Dyer was the friendly man patrolling the school crossing who one day abducted, raped and strangled three little girls – he had Pluto in Gemini in the 8th ruling a Scorpio Ascendant. Arthur Bremer, who gunned down Senator George Wallace, also had Pluto in this house. Rodden writes that ‘his diary stresses his sexual frustration and preoccupation.’
When the natural energies of sex and aggression are obstructed in their development and expression, and left to fester in the underworld, they turn ugly and deadly. Unless examined and positively channelled, they accumulate power and burst into consciousness, blasting through all ego-controls. Before the person knows it, all hell breaks loose.
Obviously, not all people with Pluto in the 8th are going to fall into the category of a Churchill or a child molester. And yet one thing is certain: a tremendous reserve of energy, what some would call ‘coiled-up serpent power’, lies in waiting.
The 8th house describes what passes between people, and with Pluto there, the token of exchange is intensity. Partnerships may involve power struggles, physical or emotional violence, or the breaking of taboos. Some have a propensity for tragic, tortured or transformative relationships in the tradition of Romeo and Juliet, or Tristan and Isolde. Behind the symbolism of the sexual act is a craving for self-transcendence or power. Fearing the excessiveness or the chaos of their powerful emotional drives, they may attempt to avoid close contacts altogether. Pluto in the 8th also sometimes describes conflict, treachery and intrigue around other people’s money. Complications and long-drawn-out problems can arise over inheritances, taxes, business deals and divorce settlements, especially if Pluto is adversely aspected. Their value system in general may differ significantly from a partner’s; or what the partner believes in may dramatically affect and change them. They may want to challenge and tear down what another person holds in esteem.
Besides having to deal with their sexual and aggressive drives, they will most likely need to grapple with issues around death. Freud felt that we all harbour a death-wish(Thanatos) and yearn to return to the tension-free state that we experienced before birth. This longing to break through limited boundaries, to tear the self down in order to dissolve into non-being, may be strong for those with Pluto in the 8th. Some may flirt with death by putting themselves in dangerous or highly risky situations, or by unconsciously playing out self-destructive tendencies. Others may be fascinated by the whole topic and research extensively into life after death, reincarnation and related metaphysical concepts.
I have met a number of people with this placement who have had close brushes with death, and after a narrow escape came back to life and reassessed all their priorities. Others may have more than their fair share of experience with the deaths of those close to them. And yet, I have also encountered others with this placement who are absolutely terrified and anxious about their own deaths. They may need to be reminded that death is an inextricable part of life – to deny death is also to deny life. If we fully acknowledge that we will one day die, then it can plunge us into living more authentically and appreciating each passing moment as fully as possible. St Augustine once wrote, ‘It is only in the face of death that man’s self is born.’3Death jolts us into life.
If they are not afraid of it, these people are closely attuned to energies at work on the deeper levels of life and will hear rumblings in the atmosphere far sooner than others. The sensory apparatus is something like those of animals who know beforehand when an earthquake is about to come. There is a desire to understand and even gain mastery over the secrets of nature and what some might term ‘occult powers’. Sometimes without consciously being aware of it, these people work ‘magic’, influencing situations and other people through the manipulation of these subtle forces. Inexorably drawn to penetrate the realm of forbidden knowledge, they dare to explore levels of existence that others are unaware of or fear to approach.
Pluto in the 9th
I have observed that, in general, people approach the house in which Pluto is placed in two very broad but different ways. Some plunge into the affairs of the house, grappling with the deeper issues and implications of that realm, and inevitably are changed and transformed through what they experience there. Others, trying to preserve their already existing sense of self and fearing what this planet might do to them, close the door and try to shut Pluto out of the house altogether. They forget that he has an uncanny ability to break locks.
This same dynamic applies to Pluto in the 9th. On one level, the challenge for those with this placement is to join Pluto in a quest for a deeper awareness of the ultimate concerns of life. With Pluto here, religious and philosophical issues are often approached with a seriousness and reverence, as if their survival depended on coming to grips with the nature of God or existence. The spiritual drive can be obsessive and fanatical: they are often voracious to find answers and to discover the basic, irrefutable laws and patterns which govern life. In search of the truth, they reach for the bright heavens or plumb the dark undercurrents and depths of the psyche. And what they are really looking for is the ground under their own feet. How can life be faced unless there is something to stand on? Even if the ground is slippery and treacherous, it is still better than no ground at all.
Even if it should turn out that life has no givens, and there is no pre-ordained design or structure to existence, those with Pluto in the 9th still desperately need to find orcreate meaning. But Pluto is a destroyer as well, and sooner or later their philosophies may be subjected to some sort of purgatory, or be torn down and constructed anew. In this sense, they are sometimes betrayed or let down by their cherished religion or beliefs. The collapse of a belief system may be an almost overwhelming experience, throwing them into deep despair and depression, until they are reborn again through another one.
Their dogmatism and self-righteousness could stem from the fear that if another person’s philosophy contradicts their own, then what they believe in may have to be questioned. Rather than endangering the sanctity of what they worship and adore, they may try to control what everyone else believes in or convert all others to their side. The Spanish dictator Francisco Franco was born with Pluto in the 9th ruling Scorpio on the cusp of the 3rd.
The image of God is often coloured by what planet is in the 9th. For those with Pluto here, God may not be all justice, beauty and light. Probably omnipotent, He may have a dark side to His nature and occasionally decide He doesn’t like them. He could delight in leading them to the edge of a precipice, dangling them there, or destroying them altogether no matter how ‘good’ they were. It is no wonder many of the people I have met with Pluto in the 9th have difficulty conceiving of a rosy future. As dire as this may sound, some real benefits arise out of their dilemmas. Firstly, they are forced to take a stand on suffering and find some meaning through it, even if it is a fate they can do nothing about. Secondly, they will try to derive as much as they can from every experience, engaging themselves in each and every moment far more completely than others who have a less harrowing concept of God.
I said earlier that some may not welcome Pluto in the house at all, although he invariably finds a way of sneaking in. Along these lines, I have met people with this placement who, afraid or thwarted by the search for truth, turn nihilistic. Diametrically opposite to those who use Pluto’s constructive probing, these people are aimless and apathetic, and don’t see the value in anything. Why bother if it all ends in death anyway? But this is exactly why they should bother. Death is probably the most important event in life, and we can’t die well unless we have lived well. Cicero said ‘To philosophize is to prepare for death.’4Unlike those with Pluto in the 8th, these people are not necessarily suffering from the repression or malfunctioning of sexual or aggressive instincts, but from the repression or frustration of an equally important and particularly human drive – the will to find meaning in life.
While the 8th house represents drives which push us from within, the 9th represents strivings or goals which pull us from without. For those with Pluto in this house, there is a strong pull to follow Pluto’s lead, and yet much anxiety and trepidation about what they might encounter in the process. This dynamic applies to the pursuit of higher education and long journeys as well.
Experiences which evoke profound transformations can occur through higher education. Pluto is met within the halls of academia, either in the guise of an important professor who profoundly arouses them, or through conflicts and challenges which any particular course or educational system presents. In certain cases, they may drastically alter their major focus of study at some point during the education. A few people with Pluto in the 9th might make discoveries which require the rewriting of history, the revising of any discipline, and the elimination of that which is old and false in some system of thought. The zoologist Thomas Huxley, who lectured in natural history andprofoundly affected the scientific thinking of his time, was born with Pluto in Aries here.
Long journeys represent another area in which a 9th house Pluto is activated. They can be transformed through travelling or through encountering and assimilating the knowledge and traditions of cultures other than their own. One famous example of this is the artist Paul Gauguin, with Pluto in Aries in the 9th ruling Scorpio on the 4th. He left his wife and children behind (Scorpio on the 4th) and emigrated to Tahiti, where he produced his most famous works and may have contracted syphilis; he later died of this disease in the Marquesas islands. There is a possibility that some people with Pluto in the 9th may project the unacceptable parts of their own psyches onto another race, religion or culture – persecuting and blaming something outside themselves for what is dark or evil in the world.
The relationship with in-laws might also be the sphere where Pluto is felt. For instance, if in difficult aspect to the Moon, the mother-in-law or sister-in-law might be seen as threatening or manipulative. The death of an in-law may have a profound effect on the life.
Pluto in the 10th (and Scorpio on the MC)
If we take the 10th house to represent the mother, then those with Pluto here may see her as dark, threatening and possessing the ability to destroy them. She can be experienced as a witch, or someone who is primeval, ruthless and manipulative. They may sense a seething anger and pent-up frustration or sexuality emanating from her. They feel as if she is always there, somehow watching them, even if she is not physically present. In short, she is felt to be dangerous and untrustworthy. However, in reality, she may not be this sort of person at all, but the child with Pluto here, in certain cases, may experience her predominantly in this way. Or sometimes the early death or loss of the mother is the root of later problems in life.
As covered in the general discussion of the 10th house, our early experiences of the mother (our first container) will contribute to the way in which we relate to the larger container of society. If the image associated with a negative Plutonic mother is projected onto the world, then these people will fear that the world is a dangerous place intent on destroying them. Some with this placement may react to this by withdrawing from society altogether and having as little to do with the world as possible. Others may compensate for their dread of being devoured with an obsessional need for power and control over others. Attempting to regain a lost sense of infantile omnipotence, they strive to extend their territory of influence to include as much of the world as they can. If they are in control, if they are the ones in authority, then they feel safe. Their need for power can be so consuming that any means will justify achieving those ends, as in the case of President Nixon with Pluto in the 10th. Also, there is a distrust of anyone who has authority over them, a desire to dethrone or destroy those in charge before it’s too late. For all these reasons, those with Pluto in the 10th need to re-evaluate and come to a deeper understanding of their underlying psychological motives for ambition, power or worldly success.
Of course, the above description is a one-sided explanation of Pluto projected in a negative light. It is possible that the mother may carry a positive Pluto association. She could be viewed as the great bestower of life, and experienced as an exceptionally capable source of comfort and support through all the contingencies of daily life. Somepeople I know with this placement have watched the mother struggle successfully with a personal crisis or a severe life trauma, and were most impressed with her ability to manage hard times and come out the other side renewed and regenerated. She then became a positive prototype for later challenging experiences with which they had to contend. In this way, as adults with Pluto in the 10th they model qualities of strength, will and endurance to other people.
Pluto’s placement in the chart is where we periodically tear down, destroy or alter existing circumstances in order to create new ones. It is where we may be reduced to nothing in order to rise again. Not only did Nixon have it here, but his chief of staff, H. R. Haldeman, was born with Pluto in the 10th ruling the 3rd. He was convicted of conspiracy and spent a year and a half in jail where he wrote a book calledThe Ends ofPower. In some cases, Pluto here may indicate the loss or leaving behind of an established career and the necessity to embark on a new vocation of an altogether different nature.
Those with Pluto in the 10th ultimately require a career which is deeply engaging, meaningful, and exciting. Either the work is of a ‘Plutonian’ nature or they approach the whole area of work with the kind of intensity and complexity associated with this planet. Some may be responsible for reforming existing institutions of society which are outworn or outdated. Other fields related to Pluto are those of medicine, psychology, and occult and psychic work (Uri Geller, the world-famous spoon-bender, has Pluto here), investigative science and journalism, politics, mining, atomic research, etc. I have done charts for two people with Pluto in the 10th who were in jobs in which they were not allowed to reveal the exact nature of their work. (One of these had Scorpio on the cusp of the 3rd and spoke fluent Russian.) Some may engage in careers which reflect society’s shadowy side – such as prostitution, crime or underworld involvement.
Occasionally, I come across people with Pluto in the 10th who tell me that they have no ambition. After talking with them for a while, it becomes clear that they still see themselves as ‘small’ compared to the big, powerful world (mother) out there. Usually, on some level, they are frustrated by the lack of influence they wield, or the unchallenging job they are already in. In certain cases, it strikes me that some people with Pluto in the 10th may not find their true vocation until they are more capable of using their power wisely and for the good of the larger whole, rather than for purely personal ends.
Scorpio on the Midheaven or contained within the 10th house is similar to Pluto there.
Pluto in the 11th
The philosopher and historian Will Durant wrote, ‘The meaning of life lies in the chance it gives us to produce, or contribute to something greater than ourselves.’ For many people, the family serves this purpose. But for others it could be a group that elicits a person’s potential for nobility and gives him ‘a cause to work for that shall not be shattered by his death’.5On one level, these ideas encapsulate the highest purpose of an 11th house Pluto: to be able to immerse themselves in something greater than they are which will live forever.
Groups are meant to break down boundaries and change those with Pluto in the 11th. For this reason, some people with this placement have great problems feeling comfortable within the group situation. The destructive energy of Pluto might be projected onto the group and they feel it is trying to destroy them. Deep emotional complexes are brought to the surface through group situations, and therefore it is thearea of life through which important psychological transformations could occur. Even though it might be a frightening experience for these people, they could benefit from some sort of group therapy situation, where the undercurrents activated by the group can be openly discussed. Sometimes they end up playing the scapegoat or ‘group shadow’ figure, acting out what others in the group have repressed or denied.
Those with Pluto in the 11th could be drawn to groups interested in radical reform of society’s existing structures and institutions. Some may be more interested in groups which focus on psychological growth, likeest.Jerry Rubin, the American political activist of the sixties, was born with Pluto in Cancer in the 11th. Later, as is often the case with Pluto in the 11th house of goals and objectives, he changed his direction and joined groups of a more philosophical and psychological orientation. Jean Houston, a leading humanistic psychologist, runs groups on how to be a more fully realized and ‘extended’ human being – she has Pluto in the 11th as well. I have noticed that a number of musicians and conductors have this placement of Pluto – the band or the orchestra being the group which is essential to their work and expression. In certain cases, it is possible that someone with Pluto here might join a group as a 5th columnist, for the purpose of undermining or infiltrating it. Motives are not always that cut and dried where Pluto is concerned.
While zeal for a just cause is always a positive thing, a difficultly aspected Pluto in the 11th could give rise to what some psychologists call ‘crusaderism’. These people are demonstrators in search of an issue, compulsively embracing one cause after another. The motives for such hard-core activism might be examined to see if it is not masking some deep fear about the purposelessness of their lives.
Pluto in the 11th also reveals itself through friendships. On a positive note, this could mean very deep and profound friendships which endure over many years and through periods of crisis and change. Invariably, however, there is a complexity about friendship with Pluto here. Betrayal may be an issue – they may be deceived or let down by someone they trusted or discover that they, themselves, have the ability to be ruthless and turn on another. The famous gangster John Dillinger, betrayed by the ‘lady in red’, was born with Pluto in this house ruling Scorpio on the 5th house of romance. The groups he belonged to were Plutonic, that is, of the ‘underworld’.
Sexual rivalry or sexual undercurrents between friends can occur with Pluto in this house. A friendship may start as a sexual relationship and grow into something else, or vice versa. The loss or death of a friend might awaken a host of psychological and philosophical issues. Power conflicts between friends are also possible with this placement. They may fear that unless they control the relationship, the friend might do something to hurt them. With Pluto in the 11th, the reasons for forming friendships should be examined – are there secret or ulterior motives for wanting to be a particular person’s friend? Conversely, they might suspect a friend of treachery in this respect.
The 11th house also describes a person’s goals and objectives in life, and the ideals one wishes to realize in the future. With Pluto here, the whole manner in which they set about achieving goals and objectives may need to be periodically examined and revised. Some may exhibit unswerving concentration and one-pointedness while others lean towards an obsessiveness which justifies any degree of ruthlessness and deceit to ensure their aims. At some point in the life, there could be a significant reorientation of their sense of purpose, direction, or the part they are to play in the larger scheme of things.
If Pluto has many hard aspects to it, they may be confused about where they fit into the collective in general. Some may feel isolated or lonely, as if the flow of history is moving in a different direction from where they want to go. Liz Greene refers to this position as the ‘doomsday prophet’ who looks to the future and sees disaster. Rather than noticing what is going right, they notice first what is going wrong, or perceive the hidden seeds of destruction in what may seem like the best or brightest of plans. Like Cassandra in Greek mythology, they may find that others do not want to hear about this vision.
Pluto in the 12th
With Pluto in the 12th, there is a pressing need to bring what’s weak, hidden or undeveloped in the psyche into clearer focus. As with Pluto in the 8th, some people might be so frightened of being overwhelmed by the nature or intensity of their deeper drives and complexes, that they exercise a tight control over these. However, very often it is not only ‘neurotic’ urges which are suppressed, but healthy, positive drives as well. The psychologist Abraham Maslow pointed out that many people not only evade what they deem is negative in themselves, but also block what is ‘god-like’ and laudable. He called this ‘the Jonah Complex’, the fear of our own greatness.6From my experience, certain individuals with Pluto in the 12th defend themselves not just against the so-called ‘lower’ or carnal drives, but also against such positive impulses as the desire to develop their ‘higher’ possibilities more fully, or to realize more of their innate potentials. To paraphrase Maslow, they are afraid to become that which they glimpse in their most perfect moments. Why?
The answer, in a nutshell, isdeath-anxiety.All change makes them highly anxious because it means the dissolution of what they already know themselves to be. Growth inevitably requires the breaking down of existing patterns or the letting go of what is familiar, and on some deep level they equate these kinds of changes with death itself. Part of them desperately yearns for growth and development, and yet another part mounts every campaign possible to ward off what they unconsciously feel is trying to kill them. Until they locate and make peace with their deep existential dread of non-being, they will keep displacing their fear onto whatever comes along which threatens to change them. Until they know they are afraid to die, they cannot fully live.
Roberto Assagioli, the founder of Psychosynthesis, a transpersonal approach to human development, was born with Pluto in Gemini in the 12th. Feeling that Freud concentrated too much on just the ‘basement’ of the human being, Assagioli devised his own psychological system to take every level of the building into account. A basic tenet of Psychosynthesis reflects the meaning of a 12th house Pluto: thatallthe elements of the psyche – both darkandlight – can be consciously recognized, experienced, accepted and integrated into awareness. Through dream analysis, introspection, therapy and various exercises and techniques, those with Pluto in the 12th can release the energy trapped in unconscious complexes and redirect it towards strengthening and building the whole of the personality, including their ‘higher’ intuitive and emotional faculties. Provided they can track down and deal with their death-anxiety, people with Pluto in the 12th are well equipped to search out what is weak, blocked, hidden or missing in the psyche. Indeed, what more appropriate place for them to exercise the innate investigative nature of Pluto than in the house of ‘secret enemies’ and ‘behind-the-scenes activity’. And rather than waiting for angry and neglected parts of their own psyches to chase after them, they are well advised to go hunting for these first.
In the 12th, the destructive energy associated with Pluto can be used to remove that which is obsolete and detrimental to new growth. Or destructive energy can be improperly displaced and unleashed outwardly in a treacherous way or dangerously turned against the self. The difficulty for those with Pluto in the 12th, however, is that they are not simply dealing with the personal unconscious but with the collective unconscious as well.
A contemporary medical model theorizes that noxious bacteria and viruses are always present in the physical system, but the healthy or strong person is able to defend himself or herself from these taking over. Similarly, stress is everywhere in society, but some people have a better ability than others to prevent it from getting into their systems. Those with Pluto in the 12th are more sensitive to what is dark, destructive or overwhelming in the atmosphere than someone with, let’s say, a well-aspected Venus in the 12th. While Venus there may feel that ‘love is in the air’, what might Pluto sniff? Some of them may unconsciously be ‘taken over’ by what other people have repressed – sexual drives, anger, hostility, etc. It is not unlikely for a child with this placement, for instance, to take on the role of family scapegoat or ‘identified patient’. When tensions run too high at home, he is the one who gets sick or burns down the school. Starting a conflagration serves two purposes: it gives a concrete expression to the emotions he feels around him and it serves to divert the parental unit from their own interpersonal problems. Those with Pluto in the 12th can make better sense of their actions and behaviour if they view what they do and feel in relation to a larger scheme of things.
The 12th house represents the greater whole out of which we come and into which we are born. Pluto there has to contend with the less pleasant aspects of this inheritance – the collective shadow, that which society as a whole finds ugly or unacceptable. They may be required to acknowledge, integrate and, if possible, transmute the anger, hate, destructiveness and rage accumulated over centuries. In this sense, they are in charge of society’s waste disposal unit. They either act out the collective’s shadow and thereby release this pent-up energy or they gather it inside themselves and find some way to creatively transform and redirect it. Albert Speer, the Nazi who served as Hitler’s minister for war and arms production, was born with Pluto in the 12th, ruling Scorpio on the 5th house of self-expression. He was somebody who supplied the weapons, in a quite literal sense, through which the collective’s hate and aggression could be expended.
Some people with Pluto in the 12th may work to transform outmoded institutions or campaign to change laws which are no longer functioning as they should. Often, and sometimes in mysterious and obscure ways, they facilitate changes on the level of the collective. In a questionnaire composed by Marilyn Ferguson, author ofThe AquarianConspiracy, respondents were asked who had influenced them most in their lives. At the very top of the list was Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, with five planets including Pluto in his 12th. (Assagioli also was in the top seven mentioned.)7
Periodic withdrawals from life may be necessary in order to grapple with emotional complexes which have been awakened through social interactions. They might be significantly affected through brushes with institutions, such as confinements in hospitals or prisons. Assagioli (Pluto in Gemini in the 12th) was put into prison in the 1930s because his humanitarian and philosophical beliefs threatened the Fascist government of Italy at the time. When he was released, he told friends that it was one of the most beneficial and creative periods of his life. The American writer O. Henryspent three years in jail writing some of America’s best-loved short stories: he had Pluto in the 12th.
As these examples suggest, Pluto here gives the capacity to transform a crisis into something productive and useful, or make the most of even limited or restricted circumstances. Assagioli wrote that it was most often during times of crises that a person discoveredthe will(Pluto), awakening to the knowledge that he or she is a ‘living subject, an actor, endowed with the power to choose’.8Even if those with Pluto in the 12th cannot change an unfortunate situation, they can still choose what attitude they are going to hold towards it. They have the ability to learn from failure and defeat and to understand the necessity of one cycle or phase of existence ending in order that another can begin. In this respect, a 12th house Pluto recalls one of Nietzsche’s sayings: ‘That which does not kill me, makes me stronger.’ Even suffering and pain can have meaning if they make a person more whole.
Scorpio on the cusp or contained within the 12th is similar to Pluto there.
Notes – Chapter 271. O. Carl Simonton, Stephanie Simonton, James Creighton,Getting Well Again, Bantam Books, Toronto, 1981, p. 24.2. Anthony Storr,Human Aggression, Penguin, London, 1982, p.34.3. St Augustine cited in M. Montaigne,The Complete Essays of Montaigne, trans. Donald Frame, Stanford University Press, California, 1965, p. 63.4. Cicero cited in Montaigne,Complete Essays, p. 56.5. W. Durant,On the Meaning of Life, Ray Long and Richard Smith, New York, 1932, pp. 128-9.6. Maslow cited by Haronian in ‘The Repression of the Sublime’, Psychosynthesis Research Foundation, New York, 1967.7. Ferguson, pp. 462-3.8. Assagioli cited by Keen, ‘The Golden Mean of Assagioli’, inPsychology Today, December 1974.

