The Twelve Houses

28.THE MOON’S NODES THROUGH THE HOUSES

The Moon circles the Earth each month, crossing the plane of the ecliptic twice: once as it ascends from south to north, and then two weeks later as it descends from north to south, at the opposite side of the zodiac. The ascending point is the north node, also known as Rahu,Caput Draconisor the Dragon’s Head. The descending point is the south node, also referred to as Ketu,Cauda Draconis, or the Dragon’s Tail. The north node and south node will always fall in opposing signs and houses.
Since the nodes of the Moon occur where the Moon crosses the apparent path of the Sun around the Earth, they symbolically link the Sun, Moon and Earth together. Understood in this way, the houses highlighted by the nodal axis indicate the spheres of life where we might successfully fuse or integrate the complementary solar and lunar principles within the personality. A brief recapitulation of the inherent conflict between the Sun and Moon principles will make the function of the nodes clearer.
Ishtar, a typical Moon goddess, was worshipped as ‘the all-accepting one’. Sometimes symbolized as a prostitute who ‘gave herself’ to anyone who came along, icons of her were placed on the windowsills of ancient Babylonian homes. In a non-discriminating and non-choosing way, Ishtar went with whatever happened. If she was feeling joy, she gave herself to joy. If she was feeling pain, she gave herself to pain. In this sense, the Moon is identified with the emotions and feelings, and with the instinctual urges of the body.
Acting out of habit and stored memory-impressions, the Moon represents the regressive pull back into the past. Past experiences condition our expectations and behaviour later in life. If, as children, we only had Mother’s full attention if we were sick, then a lasting impression would be recorded into consciousness that the way to be noticed was to be ill. Later in life, we might instinctively fall sick if we felt in need of attention. In this sense, the Moon is repetitive and ‘lazy’. But many of the Moon’s stored memory-impressions from the past are useful later in life: the Moon principle allows us to draw on a reservoir of instinctual wisdom – acquired not only in early childhood but inherited from our ancestral and animal past and coded in every cell of our bodies.Thehouse occupied by the south node of the Moon is a sphere in which, for better or for worse, we actinstinctively and from habit.
Complementing the principle of the Moon, the Sun represents the Hero. The hero does not necessarily let himself be seduced by the Moon goddess. The Sun or heroic principle is the proponent of the will (the ‘organ of the future’), while the Moon aligns herself with the memory (‘the organ of the past’).1The will is suggestive of resolution and determination, and of self-generating rather than reactive behaviour. Resisting the pull from the past, the Sun has the power to provoke change, implement choice, and spontaneously inaugurate a series of successive actions. While the Moon is swayed by feelings and instincts, the Sun chooses to create the situation as it sees fit, guided by the direction it wants to take.The house in which the north node of the Moon is placed requiresthe exercising of the solar heroic principle. This area of life is a fresh field of experiencehallmarked for us to explore and conquer. Developing ourselves in that area brings forth previously untapped potentialities and adds to our repertoire of skills. Through attending to this domain we create new experiences for ourselves and generate new possibilities. The struggle to master and expand ourselves in that spectrum of life inspires a deep sense of purpose and direction.
An analogy can be drawn between the north and south nodes and the human brain. One part of the brain stores what is inbred and instinctual and serves to maintain the organism. However, another area of the brain –the cerebral cortex– is a more recent evolutionary development. The cortex is not required to maintain life: it can be removed and yet life-processes like the functioning of the heart, digestion, lungs and metabolism will continue. The cortex serves a different and yet very important purpose – it governs all the higher psychological capacities of humans, such as thought, imagination and the organization of experience. With the development of the cerebral cortex, we are no longer bound to meet life in an instinctive and stereotyped way, but we have gained the capacity to be self-reflective. The cortex enables us to be conscious of being conscious. We can now imagine different possibilities and make choices to bring the desired ones about.2It would appear that the south node corresponds to the instinctual seat of the brain, while the north node relates to the cerebral cortex.
To open the door to the north node’s house, we first have to overcome a tendency to stay too long in the area of life or way of being suggested by the opposite placement, the house of the south node. The south node is the domain of capacities already developed. Like the Moon goddess, we are drawn to that sphere instinctually and from habit. It serves as a kind of resting place, an area of life where we can digest experience and recharge our batteries before embarking on new and unknown territory. I must emphasize that many of the pre-coded patterns and capacities of the sign and house placement of the south node are undoubtedly precious and are not to be unduly discarded and neglected. But some of these tendencies might have played out their usefulness and are followed because that is simply what is easiest to do. The door to the south node’s house is easily opened and we may unconsciously escape into this domain to avoid the struggle of growth in other directions. Entering the house of the north node takes more doing: the key is turned through the exercise of the will and the effort of choosing. Lazy people don’t pass through the threshold.
The houses brought into contention by the nodal axis provide the fields of experience which awaken us to the archetypal conflict between unconscious, habitual behaviour (the Moon) and conscious choice (the Sun). The south node represents what has already been packed in the suitcase when the journey began. We have it at our disposal. The north node points to new acquisitions and wealth we can purchase along the way, providing we are willing to pay the price and make the effort to shop around. It doesn’t have to be an either/or situation between the south and north node spheres. And/and is possible and preferable. But if the field of experience associated with the south node is overdone at the expense of the north node, then growth is slowed down. We don’t pick up anything new along the way.
North Node in the 1st, South Node in the 7th
These people should learn to stand on their own feet, making decisions and choices based on what they need or want for themselves. They must honour who they are. The line of least resistance is to allow others to dominate them and to over-adjust by trying to be too much what others need or want them to be.

South Node in the 1st, North Node in the 7th
These people tend to live too much for themselves, only looking out for Number One. They need to learn more about co-operation and compromise, through adapting themselves more readily to what others need and require, especially in the area of close partnership and marriage.
North Node in the 2nd, South Node in the 8th
They should develop their own resources and values rather than relying on the resources and values of other people. There is the need to earn money in their own right, even if they could live comfortably off others. In this way, they gain a truer sense of their self-worth. There is a need to come to terms with and accept the world of form and matter.
South Node in the 2nd, North Node in the 8th
They may have rigid value systems which need to be altered by taking other people’s viewpoints and beliefs into consideration. Some may feel that allowing others to help or support them is a sign of weakness, and that self-sufficiency in all matters is the priority. They should endeavour to help other people develop a greater sense of self-worth. They may need to learn that pain and crises, rather than just being things to be avoided at all costs, often bring opportunities for growth and positive change.
North Node in the 3rd, South Node in the 9th
There is the need to develop the capacity to think rationally and logically rather than being overly swayed by blind faith. Their intuitive vision may be good, but the issue is integrating this into the everyday life. It is worth exploring all the possibilities at hand and what the immediate environment has to offer, before rushing far afield to seek what they are after.
South Node in the 3rd, North Node in the 9th
There may be too great an emphasis on the rational and logical mind and they need to develop the more intuitive, feeling and creative side of the brain. There is a danger of being too provincial, and they should expand their awareness by exploring other cultures and belief systems rather than just the ones they have known during childhood.
North Node in the 4th, South Node in the 10th
Growth comes through ‘inner work’ on the self. Rather than basking in outward achievement and being in the limelight, these people should take time to develop the private and personal sphere of life, especially the home base. In other words, the home and soul should not be neglected for the sake of worldly success. Activities which are nourishing to the feeling life of the person and which enhance psychological self-knowledge are encouraged.
South Node in the 4th, North Node in the 10th
There is the need to venture from the home base and balance any tendencies towards morbid introspection or hiding the self away through finding a job or career which serves the collective in some way. In a woman’s chart, this indicates that just being a housewife is not enough. Reclusive or introverted tendencies may vie with the need to develop some sense of their own authority, power and usefulness through a career.

North Node in the 5th, South Node in the 11th
There is the need to further develop their personal creativity, giving more spontaneous expression to the self and feelings. Anything which augments their sense of specialness and uniqueness should be encouraged, rather than just blending in with the crowd. Taking on communal goals and objectives rather than defining their own needs and wishes can be detrimental to individuation. In other words, it is too easy to be swayed by others rather than standing up for the self.
South Node in the 5th, North Node in the 11th
These people should be encouraged to become involved with group endeavours. There is a need to develop social and/or political awareness, to promote a common cause rather than just being concerned with their own personal affairs or interests.
North Node in the 6th, South Node in the 12th
More attention needs to be paid to the efficient and practical management of everyday life. Not accepting the responsibilities of mundane existence, there can be too much daydreaming, or a secret desire to be rescued, saved and looked after by others. Developing and refining their skills, talents, resources and practical capabilities will give more satisfaction. The body needs to be cared for and respected.
South Node in the 6th, North Node in the 12th
Greater sympathy and understanding of others is needed to balance an overly critical or judgemental nature. They could be too controlled and rational, believing only in that which can be seen, proved, measured or tested. The ‘heart centre’ needs to be opened so that they feel connected to something greater than themselves. In this way, life becomes richer and more meaningful.
Notes – Chapter 281. Hannah Arendt cited by Yalom, p. 291.2. Russell, pp. 19-20.
