The Twelve Houses

30.A CASE STUDY

Any placement in the horoscope can only be understood in the context of the entire chart. No matter how well the meaning of a planet in a house is comprehended, we still have to consider many other factors in order to fully interpret the significance of any house. These include:
1. The aspects to the planet(s) in the house.
2. The sign on the cusp and other signs in the house.
3. The ruling planet of the sign on the cusp, and its placement by house, sign and aspect.
4. The ruling planet(s) of any other sign(s) in the house and their placement by house, sign and aspect.
The following case discussion is included to help clarify the art of synthesizing these different chart factors in reference to the houses.
Kate: A Woman in Search of Her Own Power
Kate is an attractive woman in her early forties. While keeping a secretarial job as a means of earning a regular income, she uses her free time to study psychology and healing. Recently, she has begun to counsel people on a part-time basis, and has led a number of groups on various aspects of ‘spiritual healing’ and self-healing. At present Kate is single, but she has been married twice – her first husband died suspiciously from a mixture of drugs and alcohol, and she was divorced from her second husband in 1972. She has a sixteen-year-old daughter (Sally) whom she has raised almost entirely on her own.
Kate and I have met twice over a period of two years to interpret her chart. A clear correlation between her house placements (see Figure16) and what she has reported to me about her life can be seen in these details of her case history, clarifying how the energies in a house actually manifest in the unfoldment of the life-plan.
Ascendant and 1st House
Those with Leo on the Ascendant create a world in which the need to develop their power, authority and creative expression (Leo) is the means of defining their individual selfhood (1st). Because the Ascendant ruler – the Sun – is placed in the 5th, self-discovery is also linked to the 5th house: Kate told me that raising a child on her own (5th house – children) has contributed more than anything else to her sense of power and capability. It is also through the spare-time activities (5th) of studying psychology and healing that Kate’s real inner self has been touched.
At first glance, it might seem that the Sun in Sagittarius in the fiery 5th should have no problems freeing the creativity and self-expression. But in Kate’s case, the Sun (the chart ruler) is aspected by all three outer planets, suggesting the battles, challenges and breakthroughs she has faced in finding her own identity and confidence. Kate told me that she was afraid of her own power for a long time – particularly in the ‘psychic’ area, ‘which terrified me and I tried to fight off’.
Fig. 16 ‘Kate’, born 25 November 1943, 21:20 GDT (-1), Bloxwich, England (52N37, 2W00)
Pluto in the 1st denotes that life is viewed as a struggle with many traumatic ups and downs and occasional sweeping changes. Her two marriages involved either emotional or physical violence, and both ended rather drastically. (More on this will be covered in the 7th house.) Pluto is close enough to the Ascendant to suggest something difficult about her birth. Kate was born six weeks late during World War II and the delay put her mother under terrific strain. Throughout Kate’s life, transitions into new phases of being are accompanied by mounting tension and a slow, gradual build-up to change.
Pluto marked her early years, and at the age of five-and-a-half (as the progressed Ascendant conjuncted Pluto) she nearly died of bronchial pneumonia. At the same time, she was cut off from her grandmother – the one family member to whom she felt close and who had been a surrogate mother since Kate’s birth. She compared this period with later ones in her life: ‘It was like going through a tunnel alone, with no support.’ True to her 1st house Pluto, she also kept her deepest feelings and fears bottled up inside her, but the ‘occasional small event would trigger huge eruptions in me’. Kate once said, ‘Perhaps when I learn to live harmoniously with my own darkness, I will be ready to fully accept and express all that I am.’ With Pluto in the house of self, the journey to find who she really is must include a descent into the underworld.
Kate commented: ‘Finding myself has been a major task – projecting myself out to the world looks like taking the rest of my life!’ This statement reflects the north node in Leo in the 1st – again highlighting the need to find her identity, power and creativity in her own right and often against difficult odds.

2nd House
Benevolent Jupiter is in Kate’s 2nd house. In keeping with the nature of this planet, Kate remarked, ‘I always seem to have the ability to scrape up what’s most needed from somewhere just when things are really bad.’ She commented that the way money comes to her when she is desperate has contributed to her feeling that she is ‘connected to something greater – it all does have a purpose and ultimately that is good and positive.’
The 2nd house is what we value, and Kate definitely values her freedom (Jupiter). ‘I don’t value material things – in fact, I can’t wait until Sally is old enough to leave home – then I shall be free to travel and go where I please.’ The 2nd house Jupiter squares the 5th house Sun. The kind of growth gained from being a parent (Sun in 5th) is important to her and yet conflicts with (squares) the freedom (Jupiter in the 2nd) which she so dearly treasures. Jupiter in the 2nd rules Sagittarius in the 5th; proving she could support Sally has given Kate greater confidence, optimism and courage.
Kate herself said that her real values are ‘spiritual ones – a yearning for meaning and transcendence’ (Jupiter). She believes in the magical and uplifting qualities of certain objects, and has certain minerals and rocks around the house which she will hold in her hand to draw strength and healing when needed. In this sense, the material world is imbued with the protective, inspirational attributes of Jupiter.
3rd House
The 3rd house describes one’s mental style, early education, way of communicating, and relationship with siblings. Neptune in the 3rd often exhibits an uncanny insight into the undercurrents at work in the environment. From Kate’s description of her early life, it appears that there was an unwritten family rule that ‘nothing was ever talked about overtly’. Kate sensed many things were wrong with her parents’ marriage, but it wasn’t until her early teens that her suspicions were openly confirmed.
Neptune often has to make sacrifices in the house in which it is placed. In the 3rd, Kate had to make many adjustments to the needs of her younger brother, who was epileptic, although his condition was never properly explained to her. All this highlights the atmosphere of loneliness and alienation Kate felt in the early home. With Neptune in the 3rd ruling Pisces on the 8th, and a Pisces mother and father, Kate learned to keep everything she was feeling hidden away – quite a difficult assignment for someone with Sun in Sagittarius in the 5th and Leo rising.
Neptune is associated with faith and religion and the 3rd with education. At age seven, Kate was sent to a Church of England school. Restless Mercury rules the cusp of her 3rd house, and the family moved home six times during Kate’s growing-up years. When she was eleven, they moved from a large town to a tiny village where she experienced enormous problems adjusting. In true Neptunian fashion, Kate wanted to fit in and be part of something, and yet this constantly eluded her. She reminisced:I wouldn’t even open my mouth in school because my accent was different from everyone else in the class. When I did speak, nobody could understand me. Nobody knew I was intelligent even though I always did well in exams.
With Neptune, the planet of mystery, in the house of education, Kate was a mystery to the other girls at school.
Later in life, Kate’s 3rd house Neptune manifested in psychic powers: she has the ability to ‘pick up on’ other people’s thoughts and admits to ‘seeing things around methat others just don’t see’. She has experienced telepathic contact and communication with people at a distance (Neptune rules Pisces on the 9th house cusp). She also freely confesses to daydreaming (Neptune in the 3rd) about all the places she would love to visit (Pisces on the cusp of the 9th).
Her second husband brought out the link between Neptune in the 3rd and Pisces in the 8th (what is shared between people). He constantly lied to her about important things. She said:His lying and deceit took me to the depths of despair. I thought I was going insane. But it was that experience which indirectly led me to the acceptance of my psychic gifts – I could always tell when he was not being truthful. I knew when he had a car accident 250 miles away and I ‘saw’ his supposedly dead daughter who turned out to be very much alive and exactly as I had ‘seen’ her.
Kate feels that all the pain in her growing-up years and problems at school have contributed to her desire to want to help others who are suffering. This attitude reflects the placement of Chiron, the wounded healer, in the 3rd.
Virgo on the 3rd and Mercury in the 5th suggests that her work (Virgo) could involve some sort of writing. Besides secretarial jobs in law and advertising, she has done volunteer work on an audio magazine for blind people. She has written articles for various journals on metaphysical philosophy and alternative medicine (literally 3rd house writing about esoteric – Neptunian – things). She also undertook a volunteer training as a nurse and has studied healing with various teachers. In this sense, she has studied (3rd house) how to help and rescue (Neptune) others around her.
IC and 4th House
Appropriately with Venus and Libra at the IC (and Neptune conjunct it from the 3rd), Kate found her father easy to get along with and very easy ‘to get around’. She saw him as weaker than the mother (Aries on the MC), who covertly dominated him. Kate also mentioned that she learned a great deal about music and art from her father.
There is a link between the 4th house Venus and Taurus on the cusp of the 11th, the house of friends. When Kate was fourteen, she had a girlfriend who was three years older. It turned out that this girl was having an affair with Kate’s father (ruler of the 11th, Venus, in the 4th trine Uranus in the 11th). Her father would come to Kate’s room at night and sit crying on her bed, because his girlfriend was at the pub with boys her own age.
Kate’s Moon in Scorpio squared to Pluto describes the uncomfortable undercurrents in the home stemming from her hen-pecked father’s infidelity. He actually told Kate that he was waiting to divorce her mother until Kate had finished school. Apparently inheriting (4th house) some of her father’s sense of being caged by women, Kate is not comfortable in her own female body and feels tied down by the mothering role herself. In many ways, she is still fighting her father’s battle to break free of the ‘restricting feminine’ shown by the Moon squared to Pluto, widely inconjunct Uranus, and ruling Cancer on the 12th house cusp of unresolved issues from the past.
The 4th house is how we end things, and the Moon in Scorpio squared to Pluto suggests some traumatic endings. Kate’s first husband died of alcohol and drug poisoning after they split up. Shortly after she left her second husband he had a mental breakdown, broke into where she was living, and tried to strangle her.
Yearning for a more ideal home situation (Venus in Libra in the 4th), she dreams of a ‘congenial home – a cottage in Cornwall where I feel that I belong’ and is hopeful that some good relationships are yet to come. Recently she has undergone primal therapy to reconnect with the buried emotions from the past (transiting Pluto and Saturn in the 4th).
5th House
Kate admits that she never really wanted a child and even before she knew she was pregnant, she was severely depressed and ill (Scorpio on the cusp of the 5th and its ruling planet, Pluto, squared to the Moon in Scorpio). The baby was conceived in Africa where she and her first husband, Jim, were living. He was a Catholic and told her that if difficulties arose during the birth, he would advocate saving the child and sacrificing the mother. Kate had a strong intuition that both she and the child would die if she had the baby in Africa. Unconsciously trying to provoke a split, she argued and fought with her husband during the pregnancy and flew back to England to have the baby (Sagittarius in the 5th – long journeys associated with childbirth). The English hospital was well-equipped for emergencies, and in the end she needed a vacuum extraction. The Sun trine to Pluto and the Sagittarian influence in the 5th suggests her capacity to escape from danger.
The Scorpio/Sagittarius combination in the 5th reflects a split in Kate: one part of her is depressive, cynical, and sometimes suicidal (Scorpio in the 5th ruled by Pluto in the 1st), while another part is optimistic, philosophical, and full of abiding hope (Sun in Sagittarius in the 5th). But the Sun in Sagittarius does not come into its own without a struggle against the darker forces which beckon her to ‘end it all’. In a serious tone, she told me: ‘I feel that the near-death in childbirth was a rebirth into a higher level of awareness, although it took many years for this to come through.’
Sally was born with Jupiter in the 12th house (she was conceived abroad) and Pluto in the 1st (reflecting Kate’s 1st house Pluto and Scorpionic 5th). Kate feels that she is, at present, in a tight bind with Sally: she has brought her up to be independent and free-thinking and yet cannot accept many of the things her daughter wants to do. This conflict mirrors the tension between fearful and controlling Scorpio in the 5th and liberal, easy-going Sagittarius there.
Kate’s early environment was not conducive to play. The Scorpionic 5th house and the Moon squared to Pluto suggest an atmosphere where so much was kept hidden and under the surface that it felt dangerous and risky to let go and be spontaneous. Consequently, much of Kate’s innate creativity (shown by the Sun and Mercury in Sagittarius in the 5th) was suppressed and undeveloped. It was only after she left her second husband that she began experimenting with making collages and then writing – what Kate felt was an ‘important breakthrough’. Eventually, her spare-time pursuits (5th) became much more meaningful than the secretarial work she did to earn a living. At the age of thirty-two, she enrolled in college to broaden and expand her mental capacities. Only then did she realize she was intelligent.
The 5th is associated with romance, and with the Sun there, her romantic involvements could contribute to her sense of identity and worth as a person. Kate told me: ‘It was also through love affairs that I discovered I was capable – the men I met seemed to have so much confidence and faith in me – they believed in me.’ The Sun in the 5th trines Pluto in the 1st and her identity was transformed through some of theserelationships. Uranus is transiting her 5th house at present [1985] and she is utilizing and expanding more of her talents and skills. Recently she said, ‘I am fed up with being surrounded by people who don’t know there is a real me in there, who also has needs.’
With the Sun in the 5th ruling her Ascendant, her way to the ‘real me’ is through freeing her positivity, joy and self-expression. In order to do this, she first has to release and transmute the deep pain, doubts and fears suggested by Scorpio on the cusp of the 5th and Pluto in the 1st squared to the Moon in Scorpio in the 4th. She remarked:Every time an avenue is blocked, or appears to be, it continually throws me back into uncertainty and pain. I try to rearrange the pieces yet again and come up with an answer which will show me a way out for the future.
6th House
With Capricorn on the 6th, Kate admits that she has lessons to learn in handling the routine requirements of everyday life: ‘I’m not good at running everyday affairs – I always pay the red electricity bill and keep losing important papers.’ Although she generally relates well with co-workers, she has recently had difficulties with a friend with whom she leads healing groups. (Saturn rules the 6th and is in the 11th, the house of friends, conjunct fiery Mars.)
Since Saturn is in the dual sign of Gemini, there is a suggestion of two jobs. As already mentioned, her part-time work involves healing and counselling but her daily bread is earned through secretarial work. She feels that it will be in the second half of life that she ‘comes into her real work’ (slow Capricorn on the cusp of the 6th).
The 6th house of health is linked to the house of groups (ruler of the 6th in the 11th), indicative of her participation in healing groups and circles. She has devised various visualization exercises that people can use to facilitate the self-healing process. In terms of her own health, she notices that her back and shoulders go rigid when she is feeling strained and uptight (Saturn rules the muscular framework of the body and Gemini is associated with the arms and shoulders). Skin problems (Saturn) continue to plague her, which may be a sign that something she is holding in wants to be released. Capricorn rules the knees, and at the age of six she fell down some steps and badly scraped her knee. An infection set in, and she still bears a scar there.
Descendant and 7th House
With free-thinking Aquarius on the cusp of the 7th and its rulers, Saturn and Uranus, in the forward-looking 11th house, her attitude towards relationship needs to extend beyond a wholly conventional framework. It would be difficult for her to remain in a partnership merely for reasons of security or out of a sense of duty: ‘I’d rather be alone than with someone I don’t fit with. It has to be someone I enjoy being with – a mental thing.’ (Both the rulers of the 7th are in the mental, communicative sign of Gemini in the 11th house of friends.)
While all but one of the other girls in the village school she attended managed to become pregnant and engaged in their last year there, Kate resisted going along with the crowd: ‘Getting pregnant and rushing into marriage was the last thing I wanted.’ Eventually she befriended Jim who worked as a merchant marine. The relationship was unusual (Aquarius on the Descendant) – he was so long away at sea, they hardly saw each other. In time they were married. They both liked to travel, and when Jim wasoffered a job in Africa, they went there to live. In true Uranian fashion (ruler of the 7th), marriage took Kate from the Midlands to exotic Africa. The day she landed at the airport to join her husband who was already there, a revolution broke out in the country. The honeymoon was over. She told me: ‘By the time we were in Africa in the middle of a civil war, it was a bit late to realize I was living with a stranger.’ Aquarius and its ruler Uranus in the 11th are both associated with collective upheavals of a political nature, and this was the backdrop to her marriage situation. Their troubles multiplied when he started drinking and she became pregnant with Sally. She felt trapped by him (Sun opposition Uranus, the ruler of the 7th). She came back to England to have the baby, and six months later Jim died.
Two years later she met Bob, her second husband. Although Bob legally adopted Sally, he became jealous of the attention Kate gave to the baby, and he resented her doing anything without him. Transiting Neptune was conjuncting her Sun in the 5th at the time and opposing her natal Uranus, the co-ruler of the 7th. Bob was a shift-worker and he expected her to adjust totally to his needs. ‘If he was at work, I was expected to stay at home. And when he was at home sleeping during the day, he wanted me at home as well. He even bought the food so I didn’t have any reason to leave the house.’ One day, she caught him beating Sally. When Kate announced that she could take no more, he beat her up and kept her and the baby prisoner in the house for a week. (Both rulers of the 7th, Saturn and Uranus, are conjunct Mars – suggestive of the violence Kate attracted.) Finally, Bob went to work to collect his pay, and Kate escaped with the baby and some belongings.
Looking back on the break-up of her second marriage, she commented, ‘Certainly my spiritual awakening began when I was totally in despair from that experience.’ (Transiting Neptune conjunct the Sun opposing the 7th house ruler, Uranus, which is natally trine to Neptune and sextile Pluto.) She realized that until she more fully defended her own needs and wants she would trap herself into relationships which were doomed to violence and failure. ‘I had to learn to stand alone after that.’ She swung to the other extreme and didn’t want anyone close to her.
As the south node in the 7th suggests, trying to derive her identity solely by being somebody’s wife was not going to work for her. She took a deep breath and willingly stepped into her north node in Leo in the 1st.
8th House
The 8th house is a continuation of the 7th, denoting what is shared between partners, and the issues that intimacy evokes. Because both rulers of Kate’s 8th house cusp, Saturn and Uranus, are conjunct Mars, we can expect that sparks will fly. Until she could honour and respect her own power, she projected it onto her husbands and then had to fight with them to wrench it back.
Saturn, a co-ruler of the 8th house of the partner’s money, is sextile to Jupiter in the 2nd. When her first husband died, she used the money from his life insurance policy to buy a house. Her second husband spent all the marriage trying to get his hands on that money. But Kate kept the house in her own name, remarking it was ‘one of my few sensible actions during that time’.
The finality of the endings of the relationships is shown by Uranus, another co-ruler of the 8th, sextile to her 1st house Pluto. The 8th house is also associated with what is subtle, mysterious and hidden in life. Saturn and Uranus, the co-rulers of Aquarius onher 8th house cusp, are both placed in the 11th house of groups. This suggests her link with a spiritualist church and her association with various psychic and healing circles, where ‘I found myself accepted for what I was and valued for my “strange powers”, which could then be shared with others.’
Some of Pisces is also in the 8th and its ruler Neptune is in Libra in the 3rd, but very near the IC. Again, this reveals her abilities as a medium – she registers and ‘takes in’ the hidden feelings of other people. Neptune’s placement near the 3rd/4th cusp and its link to Pisces in the 8th house of intimacy also suggest that unresolved dilemmas from her growing-up years will infiltrate later close involvements. As already mentioned, she was still fighting her father’s battle to free himself from the restrictions of a wife and children. In her relationships, all the charged undercurrents which polluted the atmosphere of the early home clamoured to be brought to the surface and examined. The issue of freedom versus restriction in relationship plagued both her marriages until she succeeded in acknowledging her own rights as a person. She kept recreating the past in order to free herself from it.
9th House
With the ruler of the 9th, Neptune, in the 3rd house of the mind, her thoughts will naturally turn to religion and philosophy. When Kate went back to college (9th house), she took a Religious Studies course, and wrote a thesis on spiritualism. In true Piscean fashion, she dreams of the time her life assurance policy comes to fruition and she can use the money to travel around the world, visiting the sacred sites of Egypt and other faraway lands.
Some of Aries is in the 9th house, and its ruler Mars is conjunct Uranus. She has brushes with Mars and Uranus on long journeys. As the plane she was on landed in Africa, it flew over jeeps and tanks coming to close the airport. Just as a plane she was on had left Athens airport, another plane blew up on the runway.
Aries in the 9th is also shown in the way Kate learned to stand up for herself at college (something she had never done earlier in school). When her tutor, an ordained minister, commented that he thought ‘spiritual healing’ was rubbish because he didn’t know anyone who had been healed in that way, Kate sharply retorted with ‘How long has your ignorance been the criteria for judgement?’ The ruler of Aries is conjunct Uranus and Saturn and opposition Mercury.
MC and 10th House
Kate’s mother was bursting with tension and anger (Mars, ruler of MC conjunct Uranus) and yet kept denying anything was wrong (Mars conjunct Saturn). Mother’s rule was that nothing threatening should be talked about or discussed (Mars, ruler of the MC is in Gemini conjunct Saturn). She tried to control and dominate Kate and the rest of the family so that they wouldn’t do anything to upset her. In the end, Kate left home (and the country) as soon as she could, and her father finally left home to live with another woman. After seventeen years’ separation, Kate’s mother still tells people that her husband is coming back to her, and refuses to grant a divorce. This attitude reflects the tenacity of the MC ruler, Mars, sandwiched between Saturn and Uranus, and the refusal to accept change.
The ruler of the MC is conjunct the co-rulers of the 7th, linking the house of the mother with the house of marriage. Kate kept attracting men who tried to dominate herin the same way that her mother had done. Perhaps she was hoping to repeat the past in order to change and resolve the old tension with the mother: to turn a controlling person into someone more flexible and giving. Twice failing to do this, each time she had to again break free of the restrictive mother/husband figure. Having become conscious of this pattern through self-analysis and some therapy, she is no longer unconsciously bound to its repetition. At last accepting herself, she is no longer compelled to find a monster whom she must convert and cajole into someone who accepts her as she is.
As Kate grows more confident, her Aries Midheaven becomes increasingly obvious. She told me that following college she was able to talk herself into a job for which she didn’t have the proper qualifications. It was in advertising and public relations, and she turned out to excel at the work in spite of her lack of experience. However, she had conflict with the Aries boss who demanded that she go to bed with him (Aries on the cusp of the 10th, the house of authority figures). According to Kate, he believed that if a woman worked for him, he owned her. She mimicked his words: ‘No woman has ever said no to me, you are not going to be the first.’ Having discovered her own rights and authority and her own Aries Midheaven, shewasthe first.
The ruler of the Midheaven is in Gemini and her work has always involved secretarial duties and writing. In the past few years, she has started leading some weekend seminars with a friend in various techniques of healing (ruler of the MC in the 11th). At first, she was shy and thought her friend was the one who knew more. Now Kate admits that she, herself, has something important to teach and communicate. Although other people had often seen her as strong and capable, she has finally fully ‘owned’ this side to her personality. Synchronously, more and more people are approaching her for help and guidance. She looks all set to eventually establish herself full time in the counselling and healing profession, in which she can be her own boss (Aries on the 10th, and Mars conjunct Uranus).
11th House
Saturn and Uranus in the 11th reflect the duality which Kate meets in the sphere of friendship: ‘I have two entirely different groups of friends who would probably never get along with each other. At parties we actually have two shifts to accommodate them both.’ One group mirrors Saturn – they are conventional and straight-laced; the other group comprises her Uranian friends – those who are involved in some form of alternative healing, psychology or spiritualism. Sometimes it is her friends who push her into new things, but at other times, Kate acts as the catalyst for changes in them (Mars and Uranus in the 11th). Mercury in the 5th opposes the Mars and Uranus in the 11th and occasionally she has ‘rip-roaring’ philosophical battles with her friends, some of which result in the termination of the relationship. Taking a Uranian stand, Kate told me: ‘It’s usually that they cannot accept my right to my own viewpoint and try to force theirs on me. I don’t really care what anyone believes so long as they also respect my rights to my beliefs.’ She admits the need to ‘occasionally administer a kick up the backside to my friends, which blasts them into a new orbit.’
Many of her friends are people she has met through work (Saturn in the 11th rules the 6th house of work, and Mars in the 11th rules the 10th house of career). Recalling the connection between the 11th house of social reform and the 6th and 10th houses of work, she is often the spokesperson standing up for injustices in the office. However,she adds that ‘even when I try to assert myself and apparently succeed, disaster follows on.’ (Mars is caught between Saturn and Uranus.) She once convinced a boss that the work he was giving her was not what she had been contracted to do. Feeling it was indescribably boring and a waste of her abilities, she confronted him with her objections. He totally agreed with her, and then a few weeks later sacked her from the job.
With Saturn in the 11th and ‘lazy’ Venus in Libra ruling Taurus on the cusp, she confesses to having difficulty setting goals – ‘I often just fall into whatever comes along.’ Clearer about her long-term objectives than her immediate aims, she knows she wants a healing centre cum home in Cornwall but that ‘it will take a long time to realize that dream’. (Venus in the 4th house of the home rules the 11th house of goals and groups.) Right now, her greatest interest and enthusiasm comes through the groups she is running, although ‘each one is an enormous challenge which stretches me considerably’. The 11th house is the desire to become greater than we already are: Saturn there is frightened of expanding her boundaries, but Mars and Uranus must take up the challenge. Via Mars and Uranus in the 11th house of groups and friends, Kate has tapped a vast resource of energy, authority and power. She has come a long way from the quiet girl who was afraid to open her mouth at school.
12th House
When Kate explored some regression and rebirthing exercises with a therapist, she experienced the womb as a hateful place in which she felt trapped and imprisoned. This recollection reflects the Moon in Scorpio ruling Cancer on the cusp of the 12th squared by Pluto and inconjunct Uranus. As already mentioned, she was six weeks late being born and the space available in the womb must have become tighter and smaller – what she described in her rebirthing session as ‘a hostile environment’. The 12th house indicates feelings that are in the back of our mind before we are born. Right from life in the womb (as the difficultly aspected Moon ruling the 12th suggests) Kate was not comfortable with the situation in which she was placed, and yet didn’t assert herself to get out. Later on, her own tendency to hold herself back finds a good ‘hook’ in the repressive domination of her frightened mother. Symbolized by the regressive 4th house Moon in Scorpio inconjuncted by freedom-loving Uranus in Gemini in the 11th, it is not so much the actual mother Kate had to release herself from, but rather that part of her own self which wouldn’t let her be free. Her conflict between holding back and pushing forward is also mirrored by the father’s dilemma between staying with the wife and family or establishing a new life with his mistress (the ruler of the 12th is in the 4th – the house of the father).
Cancer on the cusp of the 12th is another indication of Kate’s psychic abilities. Although neither her mother nor father professed to having such proclivities, both her grandmothers dabbled in spiritualism. As shown by the ruler of the 12th in the 4th, Kate inherited her psychic and healing faculties. The 12th house ruler, the Moon, in square to Pluto depicts the struggle Kate had in accepting these gifts – though, in doing so, her life has been transformed. Having freed something intrinsic to her nature, it is not surprising that the 5th house Sun in Sagittarius ruling Leo on her Ascendant compels her to enlighten and help others in this way.
Kate was recently in a car accident in which she was pinned to the wreckage by her seat belt and couldn’t release herself. She wrote in a letter about the incident:
The experience with the car seems to exactly fit my life. I feel trapped, blocked, helpless, powerless to move, and oh so anxious to get out … a knight in almost shining armour rescued me that time, now I feel I need to do it myself.
After such a 12th house experience, we arrive, full circle, back to heroic Leo on the Ascendant.

