The Twelve Houses
INTRODUCTION

Man is asked to make of himself what he is supposed to become, to fulfil his destiny.Paul Tillich
All around us in nature, life unfolds according to certain inner designs. A rosebud opens into a rose, an acorn grows into an oak, and a caterpillar emerges as a butterfly from its cocoon. Is it unreasonable to assume that human beings share this quality with the rest of creation – that we, too, unfold according to an inner plan?
The concept that each of us has a unique set of potentialities yearning to be realized is an ancient one. St Augustine wrote that ‘there is one within me who is more myself than my self.’1Aristotle used the wordentelechyto refer to the evolution and full blossoming of something originally in a state of potential. Along withentelechy,Aristotle also spoke ofessenceas those qualities which one could not lose without ceasing to be oneself. In like manner, Eastern philosophy applies the termdharmato denote the intrinsic identity and latent life-pattern present from birth in all of us. It is thedharmaof a fly to buzz, a lion to roar, and an artistic person to create. Each of these patterns has its own kind of truth and dignity.
Modern psychology attaches many different names to the perennial quest ‘to be that self which one truly is’2– the individuation process, self-realization, self-actualization, self-development, etc. By whatever label it is called, the underlying meaning is clear: all of us possess certain intrinsic potentials and capabilities. What’s more, somewhere deep within us there is a primordial knowledge or preconscious perception of our true nature, our destiny, our abilities, and our ‘calling’ in life. Not only do we have a particular path to follow, but on some instinctive level, we know what that is.
Our fulfilment, happiness and well-being hinge on discovering this pattern and cooperating with its realization. The Danish philosopher Kierkegaard observed that the most common form of despair is that of not being who we really are, adding that an even deeper form of despair stems from choosing to be someone other than oneself.3The psychologist Rollo May wrote, ‘When the person denies his potentialities, fails to fulfil them, his condition is guilt.’4Theologians have interpreted the fourth cardinal sin, sloth oraccidie, as ‘the sin of failing to do with one’s life all that one knows one could do.’5But how can we connect to that part of ourselves which knows what we could be? How can we find the path again, once we have lost the way? Is there any map that exists which can guide us back to ourselves?
The astrological birthchart is such a map. A picture of the heavens as it appeared at one’s place and time of birth, the chart symbolically portrays our own unique reality, innate pattern and inner design. A knowledge of the chart enables us to perceive those things which we would naturally be doing, if we had not been frustrated by family, society and, perhaps most crucially,by the ambivalences of our own nature.
Our being is not only given to us but demanded of us, and it is up to us to make of ourselves what we are meant to become. In the end, we alone are responsible for what we do with our lives, for the degree to which we accept or reject our true nature, purpose and identity. The birthchart is the best guide we have to lead us back to ourselves. Each placement in the chart reveals the most natural and appropriate way to unfold who and what we are. Why not listen to the clues the chart has to offer?

Howard Sasportas
Notes – Introduction1. St Augustine cited in Irvin Yalom,Existential Psychotherapy, Basic Books, New York, 1980, p. 280.2. Carl Rogers quoting Kierkegaard cited in Rowan,The Reality Game, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1983, p. 62.3. Rowan, p. 62.4. Rollo May cited in Yalom, p. 279.5. Abraham Maslow,Toward A Psychology of Being, Van Nostrand, New York, 1968, p. 5.

