The Twelve Houses

APPENDIX 2.

THE QUESTION OF HOUSE-DIVISIONThe only true absolute is that there are no absolutes.
Irvin Yalom
Astrologers disagree with one another over many issues, but most frequently about the houses. They squabble over the exact number of houses there should be and whether these ought to be counted clockwise or anti-clockwise. Some argue that cusps belong in the middle of a house, not at the beginning. Others insist that there is no justification for houses at all. But the fiercest battle raging over the houses is the question of which system should be used to divide them.
A properly controlled statistical study of the various systems is necessary but conducting such research is not easy. Reliable birth-times and accurate calculations would have to be ensured. Although planets sometimes change houses in different systems, it is still very tricky to validate that one placement ‘fits better’ than another. The most reliable research would test the correlation of events in a person’s life with transits, directions and progressions to the house cusps. But there are so many different techniques of progression that this approach also runs into numerous complications.
Unfortunately, the various astronomical and philosophical issues upon which dividing the houses is based are so complex and abstruse that even a practised astrologer holding an honours degree in trigonometry will still have difficulty in choosing which system is the ‘right’ one. Each has its own merits and disadvantages. It may be that one method is more appropriate for predicting events, another for a psychological reading, etc. Teachers can offer some guidance, but ultimately students of astrology will have to decide for themselves which system of house-division they prefer. There are certainly enough to choose from. All I can do is present some of the existing alternatives and briefly introduce the assumptions on which they are based. The reader is then referred to those books which describe house systems in much greater detail, listed at the end of the Appendix.
InNatal Charting,John Filbey classifies the most important of the twenty-five or so existing systems under three headings: the ecliptic systems, the space systems and the time systems. I will follow suit, giving a few examples of each.
The Ecliptic Systems
In these methods of house-division, the house cusps are determined by divisions of the ecliptic, the apparent path of the Sun around the Earth. The four best known of these are the Equal House System, the Porphyry House System, the Natural Graduation House System and the M-House Method. Let’s look more closely at two of these.
The Equal House System
Equal House is the most popular and oldest (stemming from 3000 bc) of the Ecliptic Systems, recently promoted by Margaret Hone, Robert Pelletier and others. Mathematically, it is very simple. Starting from the Ascending degree, the ecliptic is divided into twelve equal houses of thirty degrees each. Because the meridian is hardlyever exactly perpendicular to the horizon, the MC-IC axis does not usually coincide with the cusps of the 10th and 4th houses, as in most other systems. However, Equal House advocates still recognize the MC and IC by noting these points in the chart.
The beauty of this method is its simplicity. Proponents praise the way it clearly reflects the twelvefold division of the signs of the zodiac. Hone and Holden both stress that ‘the houses grew out of the signs’ and therefore it is fitting that the ecliptic should be similarly divided to form the houses.1Hone, pleased that the Equal House System avoids the problem of intercepted houses, commends its ‘great convenience’ in making aspects easier to find.2Pelletier, arguing in favour of this system, writes, ‘It seems superfluous to demand mathematical or astronomical precision of a frame of reference for houses that is purely symbolic.’3
Rudhyar is infuriated by the Equal House Method, feeling it over-emphasizes the horizon at the expense of the equally important vertical meridian axis, as if it considers ‘lying down the only significant position for man’.4Freeman also feels Equal House threatens the significance of the MC by allowing ‘it to fall where it will’.5Similarly, Liz Greene objects to the neglect of the MC-IC axis, to which she attributes the physical and psychological inheritance passed on by the parents. By not assigning this axis its proper place, the Equal House System, in her view, neglects the person’s ‘fate’.
For instance, assume that thenonagesimal,or cusp of the 10th house in the Equal House Method, is in Libra, but the actual MC is in Scorpio. The person may dream of being a great artist or beauty queen (Libra) but, due to family background, physical restrictions or practical considerations (MC), is actually better suited to a Scorpio-type career such as a psychologist or surgeon. In other words, an Equal House chart shows an internal, idealized image of what we would like to be; but the chart erected using a Quadrant system (one in which the MC and 10th house cusp coincide) shows what is actually permitted to us. For this reason, I prefer to use a chart set up by one of the Quadrant systems.
In his essay, ‘Thoughts on the Use of House Systems’, Michael Munkasey believes that because the Equal House System emphasizes the ecliptic or Sun’s path, it highlights the importance of the solar principle – which he defines as the ‘ego or creative self’. He writes that ‘if you want to emphasize or measure a Sun function, you should use the equal house or another ecliptic system.’6Because the ‘houses divided by this system refer their meaning directly to the Ascendant,’ Michael Meyer suggests that the Equal House chart enhances an understanding of the significance of the Ascendant in the person’s life.7
The Porphyry System
Devised in the third century ad, the Porphyry System also uses the ecliptic as its circle of reference. Like the Equal House Method, the Ascendant is taken to be the cusp of the 1st house, but unlike Equal House, the MC always coincides with the cusp of the 10th. The other house cusps are determined by trisecting the space between the quadrants into three equal sections along the ecliptic. The value of this system was that Porphyry incorporated the four angles into the house cusps. The system is criticized, however, because there is really no logical reason why the unequal space of the quadrants should be divided equally. It is not in much use today.

The Space Systems
In the Equal House System and the Porphyry System, the ecliptic was divided to determine the house cusps. But there is no particular reason why the ecliptic should be chosen over other possible circles of the celestial sphere. The basis of the Space Systems is to take another great circle – such as the celestial equator, the horizon or the prime vertical – divide it into twelve equal parts and project these divisions onto the ecliptic. Some of the Space Systems are the Campanus House System, the Regiomontanus House System, the Morinus House System and the East Point House System. Let’s look at the two most popular of these.
The Campanus House System
The inventor of this system, Johannes Campanus, was a well-known mathematician of the thirteenth century. While he accepted Porphyry’s idea that the four angles of the chart should coincide with the 1st, 4th, 7th and 10th house cusps, he looked around for something other than the ecliptic as the main frame of reference. He chose theprimevertical, a great circle which passes through the east and west points of the horizon as well as the zenith (the point in the heavens immediately overhead at any place) and the nadir (the point opposite to the zenith). Campanus divided the prime vertical into equal segments of thirty degrees each. The great circles which passed through these points and the north and south points of the horizon formed the house boundaries.
By selecting the prime vertical rather than the ecliptic as his primary focus, Campanus broke with the tradition of always using the apparent orbit of the Sun and the planets (the ecliptic) as the main astrological frame of reference. A precedent was set: the position of a planet in respect to the horizon and meridian of the place of birth assumed more significance than the position of the planet along the ecliptic. In other words, the space around the locality of birth became as important a consideration as the zodiac itself. Instead of the houses being projected onto the zodiac, the signs and the planets were now viewed in relation to the houses.
However, the Campanus System (as well as the other space systems) presents a problem in the higher latitudes where, in this case, the angle of the ecliptic to the prime vertical becomes more acute. The result is that the longitudinal position of the house cusps in respect to the ecliptic become more unequal, and the houses greatly distorted. This difficulty does not arise with the ecliptic systems of house-division. Margaret Hone is dubious about accepting any system which fails in some part of the world. Dane Rudhyar is more practical about it and suggests that ‘each hemisphere of the Earth and the polar regions must have its own kind of astrology.’8
Like Campanus, Rudhyar believes that while the Sun and planets are basic to astrology, they needn’t be the only essential frame of reference. In his ‘person-centred’ approach to chart interpretation, he uses the Campanus System because it so fully acknowledges ‘the space at the center of which the individual stands’.9He proposes that the Campanus System might even be the basis for the future development of a ‘birth-sphere’ or three-dimensional birthchart.
The Regiomontanus House System
In the fifteenth century, Johannes Muller, also known as Regiomontanus, modified the Campanus System. Rather than choosing the prime vertical as his primary frame of reference, he divided the celestial equator into equal arcs of thirty degrees and projectedthese onto the ecliptic. The practical advantage of this system is that it produces less house distortion in the higher latitudes than the Campanus method. Again, by going beyond the ecliptic to the great circle of the celestial equator, he put a greater emphasis on the Earth’s own daily rotation than on the movement of the Earth around the Sun. This system was very popular until 1800, and is still used by many European astrologers.
Munkasey proposes that all the space systems, in utilizing other circles beside the ecliptic, give the chart a lunar influence. By this he means they include ‘some subconscious aspects of personality development’, personality traits which are not consciously recognizable.10
The Time Systems
In these systems, the house cusps are found by equally dividing the time it takes for a chosen point (such as the Ascendant or Midheaven) to travel an arc of the celestial sphere. The best-known time systems are the Alcabitus House System, the Placidus House System, the Koch or Birthplace House System and the Topocentric House System. We will look more closely at three of these.
The Placidus House System
This method was devised by a Spanish monk, Placidus de Titus, in the early seventeenth century. Mathematically, it is one of the most difficult house systems to calculate. Put very simply, the 11th and 12th house cusps are found by trisecting the time it takes any degree of the ecliptic to travel from the Ascendant to the Midheaven (semi-diurnal arc). Likewise, the time it takes any degree to travel from the IC to the Ascendant (semi-nocturnal arc) is trisected to give the 2nd and 3rd house cusps.
At first, the system was opposed by astrologers because of its time-based factor. However, Geoffrey Dean points out that it is no more based on time than any other system, ‘because all systems can be described in terms of the division of time.’11The system eventually achieved great popularity, helped by the fact that the nineteenth-century astrologer Raphael published an almanac including a Placidean table of houses.
The main problem with this system arises from the fact that in latitudes greater than sixty-six-and-a-half degrees, many degrees never touch the horizon at all. In other words, in these high latitudes certain degrees of the ecliptic can never become the Ascendant. The whole system is based on the time it takes for a degree to move from the Ascendant to the Midheaven. If a certain degree never rises, no time-interval can be determined, and therefore this degree cannot form the cusp of any house.
Munkasey writes that the Placidus System is ‘good for emphasizing overall life goals.’ He also notes that this system provides ‘meaningful timing answers in horary and electional astrology.’12Martin Freeman prefers the time-based systems ‘because astrology is so intimately involved with time.’13Zipporah Dobyns, Liz Greene, Christina Rose and Darby Costello, leading ‘psychological astrologers’, use this system and are satisfied with its results. Whatever its strengths and failings, more astrologers use the Placidus Method than any other form of house-division.
The Koch System (Birthplace House System)
The first tables for this method were published in 1971. Its author, Dr Walter Koch, proclaimed that at long last a solution had been found to the problem of house-division.The system is based on a ‘time dynamic’, evaluating the position of all points on the ecliptic in respect to the Ascendant and the birthplace. The trigonometry involved is complex, using the arc ofoblique ascension(small circle which marks the path of a planet during its twenty-four hours of motion) of the place of birth.
Although Koch claims that his system is the only method which calculates the chart for the exact birthplace, Dona Marie Lorenz contends that Koch’s methods are ‘no more birthplace centred than any method that utilises the longitude, latitude, and time of the event for calculating the houses.’14Like the Placidean method, it fails at the polar regions.
The German astrologer Edith Wangemann is a keen advocate of the Koch System. She tested it against other methods of house-division and found that it was the most consistently accurate in correlating facial features with the cusps of the chart.15Munkasey believes that the system is exceptionally good for determining ‘where you are and where you are going, your current choices.’16
The Topocentric House System
This system is a further refinement of the Placidus Method. (Below fifty degrees of latitude, the house cusps are within one degree of the Placidean cusps.) Again, the trigonometry is complicated, and the reader should refer to the books mentioned at the end of the Appendix. What makes this system so interesting, however, is that it is the only one which has not been derived theoretically. Rather, it was devised through an empirical study of the nature and timing of events. Based in Argentina, Wendel Polich and A. P. Nelson Page studied the events in the life of a person whose birth-time was known precisely. House cusps were determined by plotting the primary directions which related to these events. The founders discovered that the cusps of these houses lay on a plane passing through the location of birth, and not on a great circle.
The Topocentric System has been verified by Geoffrey Cornelius and Chester Kemp in England. Dean reports that a fifteen-year test of this system carried out by Marr shows that primary directions to Topocentric house cusps successfully correlate with the events associated with the house.17This suggests that it is a good system to use for the timing of events. Another advantage is that no problems occur in the polar region.
A more full and detailed discussion of this system is found inRecent Advances in NatalAstrologycompiled by Geoffrey Dean, published under the aegis of the Astrological Association of Great Britain in 1977. Excellent explanations of all the systems mentioned in this appendix as well as some others can be found in Ralph William Holden’s book,The Elements of House Division,published by Fowler (1977).Tools of Astrology: Housesby Dona Marie Lorenz, published by Eomega Grove Press (1973), discusses the various house systems and includes tables of houses for nine of them. It’s probably best for the beginning student to select one method to start with and then later experiment with others in deciding which one he or she prefers. There is no right or wrong system. A photograph of a tree is still a tree no matter what stance you take it from. The angle you choose, like the house system you select, depends on the purpose and perspective you have in mind. Life is full of alternatives.
Appendix 21. Holden,Elements of House Division, Fowler, London, 1977, p.39.2. Hone,The Modern Textbook of Astrology, Fowler, London, 1951, p.284.3. Pelletier,Planets in Houses, Para Research, Maine, 1978, pp. 13-14.4. Rudhyar,The Astrological Houses, p. 34.5. Freeman p. 60.6. Michael Munkasey, ‘Thoughts on the Use of House Systems’, in Pelletier,Planets inHouses, p. 364.7. Meyer, p. 121.8. Rudhyar,The Astrological Houses, p. 34.9. Op. cit., p. 26.10. Munkasey, p. 365.11. Dean, p. 167.12. Munkasey, pp. 365-6.13. Freeman, p. 60.14. Dona Marie Lorenz,Tools of Astrology: Houses, Eomega Grove Press, Topanga, California, 1973, p. 26.15. Wangemann cited by Dean, p. 407.16. Munkasey, p. 366.17. Dean, p. 174.

