The Twelve Houses

APPENDIX 1.

THE TWELVE HOUSES: A SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS
Ascendant and 1st House (naturally associated with Mars and Aries)
That facet of universal being which seeks to express itself through each of us.
The lens through which we perceive the world.
The focus we bring into life.
The kinds of functions most valuable in discovering our unique identity.
Our relationship to the archetype of initiation – how we get things started.
The experience of our birth and the way we enter new phases of life.
How we meet life in general.
The atmosphere of the early environment.
The effect we have on others.
The quest on which the hero embarks.
Some indication of physical vitality and physical appearance.

2nd House (naturally associated with Venus and Taurus)
The differentiation of the body out of the universal matrix of life.
The awareness that mother’s body is not our own.
The attachment of our identity to the body (the body-ego).
The forging of a more solid sense of ‘I’ or personal ego.
Giving the self more definition, boundary, and shape.
Our innate wealth.
Inherent faculties or capabilities which we can develop further.
Resources or attributes which give us a sense of value or worth.
What constitutes security for a person.
Things to which we attach ourselves.
What we possess or hope to possess.
Money and the material world – our relationship and attitude to these things.
What we value.
The desire-nature.

3rd House (naturally associated with Mercury and Gemini)
The differentiation of the mind from the body (the mental ego).
The development of language and the ability to distinguish subject from object, actor from the action performed.
The concrete mind, or left-brain processes.
How we use our mind – our mental style.
Exploring the immediate environment.
Naming and classifying things.
The discovery of relativity: how do we compare to what is around us? How do these things compare and relate to one another?
The general context through which we view the immediate environment.
Siblings – our bond with them. What siblings are like. What we project onto them.
Other relatives – uncles, aunts, cousins.
Neighbours.
The early school experience.
All forms of communication – writing, speaking, information exchange.
Short journeys.
The growing-up years in general (roughly ages 7 to 14).

The Imum Coeli and 4th House (naturally associated with the Moon and Cancer)
Self-reflective consciousness and the assimilation of experiences from the first three houses.
The integration of mind, body and feelings around a central ‘I’.
A sense of the ‘me-in-here’ who is experiencing and doing.
The maintenance of the individual characteristics of the self in a stable form.
What we find when we retreat back into ourselves.
Our inner base of operation.
The home.
What we are like in private.
The roots of the being.
The soul as intermediary between ourselves and events.
The influence on us of our family of origin.
The atmosphere in the early home and early conditioning.
Qualities we carry which stem from our racial or ethnic origins.
The influence of the ‘hidden parent’ – usually the father.
The inborn image of the parent in question.
How we end things.
Conditions surrounding the end of life.

5th House (naturally associated with the Sun and Leo)
The urge to distinguish ourselves as unique and special.
The urge to expand and extend our territory of influence.
The desire to be central, to have something revolve around us.
Generativity, the ability to produce.
The outpouring of the self and the urge for creative self-expression.
Artistic expression.
Those pursuits which make us glad to be alive, which engage our heart and whole being.
Recreation, hobbies, spare-time amusements, pleasures, sporting events, gambling and speculation.
Romance – what kind of person ignites us and what happens during love-affairs.
Sex – the ability to attract other people to us and please them.
The joy we feel being loved.
Children, the physical extension of the self.
What our children are like, or what we project onto them.
The inner child in us.
Play.
Personal flair.


6th House (naturally associated with Mercury and Virgo)
Further refinement and differentiation of the self.
Characterizing the self by how we differ from other people.
Reducing things to parts (left brain).
Discrimination and selectivity.
Assessing the use we make of our power, energy and capabilities.
The relationship between what we are inside and what surrounds us on the outside; the correlation between the inner world of mind and feelings and the outer world of form and the body.
The bodymind connection.
The adjustment to necessity and living life within boundaries.
Mundane everyday reality, daily rituals.
Our relationship to servants, hired help, employees.
Our own qualities as a server.
How we approach work and our relationship to co-workers.
Craftsmanship, attention to detail, perfection and technical proficiency.
Relationships of inequality.
Health issues: the nature of physical problems and underlying psychological significance of certain illnesses.

Descendant and 7th House (naturally associated with Venus and Libra)
Reconnecting the ‘I’ to the ‘not-I’.
The kinds of activities which provide us with the realization of the significance of others.
Relationships based on mutual commitment, legal or otherwise.
The marriage partner or ‘significant other’.
The kind of partner to whom we are attracted.
What we wish to import from others.
What in ourselves we project onto a partner.
What we bring into relationship.
Open enemies: what we see in other people that we don’t like in ourselves.
The general atmosphere in close relationships.
How we meet society.
The process of collectivization and socialization.
The lower courts.
How much do I blend and co-operate versus how much do I assert my individuality?

8th House (naturally associated with Pluto and Scorpio)
That which is shared between people.
Other people’s money.
How we fare financially in marriage or business partnerships.
Inheritance, legacy, taxation, banking, accountancy, investments, etc.
How the partner’s value system interacts with our own.
What happens when two people are intimately connected and attempt to merge with one another.
Relationships as catalysts for change.
Destroying old ego-boundaries and opening new ones.
Periods of cleansing and renewal.
The drawing to the surface of unresolved issues from early bonding relationships through present relationships.
The raising of what is ‘dark’, instinctual and passionate in us.
The raging infant in us.
Containing and transforming raw, primordial energy.
Sex as a means of transcending the separate-self sense.
Divorce proceedings.
Death: physical death or the death of an ego-identity.
How we die and meet transitions.
The discovery of that which is indestructible in us.
Self-regeneration.
Our sensitivity to the eco-system and the sharing of the resources of the planet.
The astral plane – our sensitivity to invisible or intangible planes of existence.

9th House (naturally associated with Jupiter and Sagittarius)
The search for meaning, purpose, direction and guidelines in life.
Seeking the truth and fathoming the underlying patterns and laws which govern existence.
The higher mind, intuitive thought processes and the workings of the right brain.
The ability to imbue an event with significance and the symbol-making capacity of the psyche.
The style in which we pursue religious and philosophical issues.
The god-image.
What pulls us forward.
Viewing life at a distance.
Travel and long journeys.
Our view of life’s journey.
Journeys of the mind and higher education.
Codified systems of collective thought.
The dissemination of ideas – teaching, publishing, preaching and promotional work.
The higher courts.
The ability to sense the direction in which something is heading.
Relationship to in-laws.
A possible indication of career.

The MC and 10th House (naturally associated with Saturn and Capricorn)
The integration of the self into society.
Fulfilment of the individual personality through serving and influencing society.
Profession, vocation, and career – our office and status in life.
How we approach work.
The atmospheric conditions we encounter in the sphere of career.
How we wish to be seen to be working.
What we wish to be remembered for contributing to the world.
Our style before the public and the image we wish to promote.
Needs for achievement, recognition and praise.
Ambition.
The image of the ‘shaping parent’ (usually the mother).
The connection between our relationship to mother and the way we relate to the world later in life.
What we feel the world/mother requires of us.
Our attitude to authority figures and the government.

11th House (naturally associated with Saturn, Uranus and Aquarius)
The urge to become something greater than what we already are, to move beyond existing images of the self.
The identification with something larger than the self.
Circles of friends, types of friends, how we behave with friends, and what we project onto them.
Groups, systems, organizations.
The nature of groups we join, our role in groups, how we feel in the group, what we project onto groups.
Our sensitivity to new trends and currents in the atmosphere.
Social reform and causes.
Goals, objectives, hopes and wishes.
What we encounter when pursuing our aims.
Group consciousness and the inter-connectedness of all life.
The global super-organism, global brain and group mind.

12th House (naturally associated with Neptune and Pisces)
The yearning to return to the original state of unity.
Sacrificing the separate-self sense to merge with something greater and yet fearing the dissolution of boundaries.
Nebulousness, confusion, empathy and compassion.
Escapist tendencies.
Meditation and prayer.
Immersion in alcohol and drugs and other substitute gratifications for wholeness.
Service – to others, causes, beliefs or to God.
Behind-the-scenes activity, unconscious patterns and complexes.
Being swept away by unconscious compulsions.
Hidden enemies, external or internal saboteurs.
Influences from causes or sources we don’t always remember.
The umbilical effect and life in the womb.
Karma,what we bring over from past lives.
Energies which sustain or undo us.
Access to the collective unconscious, mythic images and the imaginal realm.
The unconscious as a storehouse of the past but also as the reservoir of future possibilities.
How we fare or what we meet in hospitals, prisons, museums, libraries and other institutions.
Some indication of career.
What we feel will redeem us – what we hope will give us immortality.


